TRANSLATION 

In a haunt remote of a certain valley I heard an Owl and 
a Nightingale hold great debate. Their dispute was stern and 
strenuous and stubborn: quiet at times, then loud again. 
Each bird raged against the other, uttering many a malicious 
thought: each one spake of the other's character the worst 
things that she could devise. But above all, they made their 
plaints of each other's singing: and this they did in downright 
terms. 

The Nightingale began the pleading, in the corner of a 
spinney, seated on a twig that was rich with blossom, in 
a close thick hedge with reeds and sedge entangled. Re- 
joicing she sang with many a trill and quaver, so that her 
notes seemed to come from hai'p or pipe — from harp or pipe, 
not from living throat. 

Near by there stood an old tree-stump, where the Owl was 
wont to sing her "hours." It was all overgrown with ivy, and 
was the dwelling-place of the Owl. 

The Nightingale beheld the Owl, and looked her up and 
down in scorn: for she thought but ill of her opponent, and, 
indeed, all men reckon her loathsome and foul. "Monster," 
said she, "away with thee! I am the worse for seeing thee. 
And, truly, the sight of thine ugliness often brings my song 
to untimely end. My heart doth sink, my tongue foils me, 
when thou dost thrust thyself upon me. I had rather spit 
than sing on hearing that gurgling noise of thine." 

The Owl waited till evening fell, and then she could contain 
herself no longer: for her heart had become so swollen, that she 
was almost breathless with rage. And after a while she spake 
these words: "What dost thou think now of my singing? 
Dost thou suppose that I cannot sing, though I know naught 
of all thy trilling ? Time and again thou docst me wrong, 
saying things both annoying and shameful. If I but held thee 



-no] The Owl and the Nightingale 153 

on my foot, (would that such a thing might happen !) and thou 
wert away from that twig of thine, thou shouldst sing another 
tune!" 

To this the Nightingale gave answer: "If I can avoid coming 
into the open, and find protec':ion against hard weather, I care 
nothing for all thy threats. If I keep quiet in my hedge, 
I reck naught of what thou sayest. Well do I know that thou 
art merciless to those who cannot protect themselves against 
thee : and that, wherever thou canst, thou dost attack 
little birds in cruel and wanton fashion. Therefore art- thou 
hated by all manner of birds, who are wont to chase thee out 
of their midst, crying and screeching in hot pursuit of thee. 
Even the very titmouse would gladly tear thee to pieces I 
Then thou art loathsome to behold: and loathsome art thou 
in many ways. Thy body is short : thy neck is thin : thy head 
is bigger than all thy body. Thine eyes also are coal-black 
and broad, just as if they were painted with woad: and with 
them thou glarest, as if thou wouldst devour all that thou 
mayst clutch by means of thy claws. Thy bill is strong and 
sharp and hooked, like to an awl crooked in shape : and with 
this bill thou clackest continually — which, indeed, is one of thy 
songs. But thou dost also threaten this body of mine: with 
thy claws thou wouldst like to crush me. More fitting would 
it be for thee to feed on the frog [that sits underneath the 
cogwheel of the mill]: snails and mice and other foul creatures 
arc thy natural and proper food. Thou lurkest by day and 
fiiest at night, showing by this thou art unnatural. And thou 
art horrible and dirty as well, — I refer to thy nest and to thy 
foul brood, in which thou dost rear a most filthy family. Well 
knowest thou what they do therein: they defile their nest up 
to their chins, sitting meanwhile as if they were blind. And 
of this matter men make a proverb: 'Cursed be the creature 
that defiles its own nest.* Once upon a time a falcon bred: 
his nest he did not well protect: and one day thither thou 
didst steal, laying therein thy filthy Qgg. In course of time 
the eggs were hatched, and from them came little nestlings, 
to which the falcon brought some food. He watched his nest: 
he saw them eat: and the outside of the nest he saw had been 



154 The Owl and the Nightingale [iio~ 

defiled. Then was he angry with his brood : he screamed aloud 
a^ he sternly scolded them. 'Tell me,' quoth he, 'who have 
done this thing? for it is quite against your nature. A hateful 
trick has been played on you. Tell me if ye knew aught 
about it.' Then sprnke one and spake another: 'Truly it was a 
brother of ours, yonder fellow with the big head. Bad luck 
to that head of his! Cast him out forthwith, and break his 
neck!' Whereupon the falcon, believing his brood, took the 
ugly bird by the middle, and threw it down from the wild- 
wood bough to where magpie and crow plucked it to pieces. 
And of this fable men make a parable, though the story be 
not complete. For thus it is with the worthless man, who has 
come from vicious stock. Although he live among noble folk, 
he will always betray from whence he sprang: he shows that 
he came from an addle ^%<g, though he dwell in a splendid 
nest. An apple may roll from the parent tree, on which it 
once grew along with others: yet, though it roll far, it will 
always show from whence it came." 

Such was the speech of the Nightingale, and after making 
this long indictment, she sang in tones that were loud and 
piercing, just as though one had plucked the resonant strings 
of a harp. Meanwhile the Owl had been listening, keeping 
her eyes fixed to the ground: and as she sat, puffed out and 
swollen, it was as if she had swallowed a frog. For she knew 
and was well aware, that the Nightingale sang in mockery 
of her: and yet she had her answer ready. "Why then wilt 
thou not fly into the open, arid show which of us two has the 
brighter colouring, the fliirerhue?" "No!" [replied the Night- 
ingale] "for thou hast claws that are very sharp, and I am not 
anxious that thou shouldst claw me. Thou hast talons mighty 
and strong, with which thou dost squeeze like a pair of tongs. 
Thou didst think, as do birds of thy feather, to lead me astray 
with plausible words. But I would not follow thine advice : 
I knew well thou wouldst advise me badl}'. Shame on thee 
for thy false counsel, for now thy deceit is made plain to all. 
Cover thy treachery from the light, and hide what is wrong 
behind the right. When thou dost wish to practise evil, take 
good heed it is not seen ; for treachery brings but shame and 



-225] TJie Owl and the Nightingale 155 

hatred, if it is obvious and plain to all. With thy wicked tricks 
thou hast not succeeded, for I am wary and can dodge thein : 
nor is thy daring of any avail, for my skill in fighting is 
greater than thy brute strength. I have,besides,on this branch 
of mine, a splendid stronghold broad and long; and, as the 
wise man says, 'He fights well who flies well.' But let us now 
stop this squabbling, for such talking serves no purpose: and 
let us get on with a proper trial, using fair and friendly words. 
For though we may not be agreed, we can conduct this case 
in better fashion, by observing decency and law, and with 
friendly argument, free from strife and violence: so that each 
may say whatever he will, with due regard to law and reason." 

"But," said the Owl: " Who is there to settle our difference? 
Who can and will give lawful judgment?" "I know well," the 
Nightingale answered, "of that there need be no discussion. 
Master Nicholas of Guildford is the man: for he is wise and 
cautious of speech, prudent as well in giving judgment, and 
an enemy to vice of every kind. Then, too, he has taste in 
matters of song: he knows who sings well, and who sings 
badly. He can distinguish the wrong from the right, the 
things of darkness from things of the light." 

The Owl for a time pondered on this, and at length she 
replied as follows: "I am willing that lie should judge: for 
although somewhat wild in days gone by — fond of the night- 
ingales, and other creatures, too, gentle and neat — I know 
that now his ardour is cooled. He will not be befooled by thee, 
so that, for old time's sake, he may prefer thy cause to mine. 
Thou art unable so to please him, that he for thy sake will 
utter folsc judgment. Now he is settled and steady of mind: 
follies for him have no attraction. He delights no longer in 
flighty ways: he will adopt the course th.-it is straight." 

The Nightingale, meanwhile, was ready for action: her wit 
was drawn from many sources. "Owl!" she said, "tell me 
truly: why behavest thou in unnatural fashion? Thou singest 
at ni^ht and not by day : and thy whole song is a lament, 
with which thou dost terrify all who hear thy noise. Thou 
shriekest and hootest to thy mate in a way that is awful to 
hear: so that to men, both wise and foolish, it seems not that 



156 The Owl and the Nightingale [225- 

thou singest but that thou dost weep. Then, too, thou fliest 
at night and not by day: at this I wonder, and well I may. 
For everything that shuns what is right loves the darkness 
and hates the light. And everything that inclines to evil 
likes the darkness for its deed. A wise saying there is, which, 
though unpolished, is often heard on the lips of men, for King 
Alfred said and wrote it: 'A man shuns that which knows 
him to be foul,' And so it is, I suppose, with thee: for ever dost 
thou fly at night. And another thing I have in mind : thou 
hast at night the clearest vision, whereas by day thou art 
stone-blind, seeing neither tree nor stream. In the day-time 
thou art blind and sightless: and of this, men make a parable. 
'So it is with the wicked man who sees naught to any good 
purpose, and is so full of evil tricks that no man is able to 
deceive him. He knows well the way of darkness and avoids 
the way of light.' Thus do all of thy kindred: of the light 
they have no care." 

The Owl listened for a while in a state of great vexation. 
At length she spake: "Thou art called the Nightingale: but 
'Chatterbox' would describe thee better, for thou hast too 
much to say. Let thy tongue now have a rest! Thou dost 
suppose that the whole day is thine: but let me now have a 
chance. Keep quiet and let me speak: and I shall be revenged 
on thee. And listen how I can clear myself with truthful words 
without ado. Thou sayest that I hide by day: and this I in no 
way deny. But listen and I'll tell thee why — the whole reason 
for the same. I have a strong and sturdy beak, good claws as 
well both sharp and long, as befits one of the hawk-tribe. It 
is my joy, my delight as well, that I live iu accord with 
Nature : and for this no man can blame me. In me it is 
plainly seen that by Nature's laws I am so fierce: and that is 
why I am hated by the little birds, that fly near the ground 
and in the thickets, as they twitter around me, uttering their 
cries and bringing their flocks in force against me. But I 
prefer to take a rest, sitting quietly in my nest: for I should 
be no better oft* if I put them to rout with scolding or 
with chattering, or by using bad language as the shepherds 
do. Nor do I care to bandy words with such spit-fires: and 



-355] The Owl and the Nightingale 157 

therefore I keep them at a distance. There is a wise proverb 
in common use among men, that 'one should not rail against 
a fool nor vie in yawning with an oven': while once I heard 
that Alfred had said 'Be not present where railing and ruffling 
are rife: let fools quarrel and go thy way.' And I am wise and 
follow this counsel. Moreover Alfred said in another place a 
proverb that is also familiar: 'He that has to do with what 
is foul, never comes off entirely clean.' Dost thou then think 
the hawk is any the worse, though crows cry out against him 
in the marshes, and though they draw near with their cawing 
as if they were about to attack him? He, for his part, takes 
the wise course: he flies away, and lets them caw." 

"But thou dost charge me with other things: thou s'lyest 
that I cannot sing, that my one theme is lamentation and 
that it is awful to hear. This is not true: I sing smoothly, 
with full melody and in loud tones. Thou dost regard every 
song as dreadful that is different from thy piping tones. As 
fur my note, it is bold p^nd masterful — much like the sound of 
a great horn ; while thine is like that of a tiny pipe fashioned 
out of a reed unripe. My singing indeed is better than thine. 
Thou dost chatter like an Irish priest: but I sing in the 
evening at the proper time, afterwards at bed-time, and again 
at midnight : and once more I begin my song when I behold 
the dawn, the morning-star rising from afar. Thus I do good 
with my song, warning men to their advantage. But thou 
dost sing all the night long, from evening until dawn : and thy 
song is ever the same while darkness lasts. Thy wretched 
throat keeps up its noise, never ceasing night nor day : and 
with this din thou assailest the ears of all who dwell around, 
making thy song so cheap withal, that men reckon nothing of 
it. For every pleasure may last so long that in the end it 
ceases to please : whether it be note of harp or pipe or bird, 
each shall displease if kept up too long. Be the song ever so 
meiTy, it shall become quite distasteful if it lasts beyond the 
proper time. For it is true— Alfred said it, and it may also be 
read in books — ' Every thing may lose its virtue by excess and 
superfluity.' With pleasure thou mayst glut thyself, and a 
surfeit brings on loathing: so every joy may cease to be if 



.; 



158 The Owl and the Nightingale [355- 

ever maintained the same. And this is true, with one 
exception — that is the kingdom of God, which alone remains 
dear and ever the same. Though continually thou take from 
its fulness as from a basket, yet it remains full to overflowing. 
This is the marvel of the kingdom of God, that for ever it gives, v 
and for ever it remains the same." 

"But thou dost bring forward another shameful charge — 
that I am defective in my eyes. Thou sayest that because I fly 
at night, I am unable to see by day. But there thou liest ! for it 
is clear that I have good eyesight, since no darkness is so dim 
as to prevent my seeing. Thou dost suppose that I cannot see, 
because I do not fly by day. But the hare lies low throughout 
the day,and nevertheless he sees quite well. If the hounds per- 
chance come out against him, he darts away quickly, winding 
his way along narrow tracks, turning to account his ready tricks, 
hopping and leaping in swiftest fashion as he makes his way 
to a place of covert. This he could not do, despite his eyes, 
unless with them he saw things clearly. And I can see as 
well as the hare, though by day I sit and lurk. When bold 
men c^o to war and make their expeditions {av and near, when 
they overrun many peoples, performing at night their good 
pleasure, then I follow i_n_their train and fly by night in their 
company." 

Al] this the Nightingale took to heart, and pondered long 
as to what she should answer. She could not refute what had 
just been said, for the Owl had spoken wisely and well: and. 
annoyed that she had carried the argument so far, she feared 
lest her reply should somehow miscarry. In spite of this she 
spake out boldly; for he is wise who, undismayed, presents a 
brav€! front to his foe, so that he through cowardice be not 
found wanting. For the foe who will yield if thou turnest 
not away, will yet become bold if thou shouldst flee. If he 
sees thou art no craven, he from a boar will become a tame 
pig. And therefore, though the Nightingale was shaken, yet 
she spake up bravely. 

"Owl !" said she, "why behavest thou so, ever chanting in 
winter thy song of woo ? Thy song is like that of a hen 
in the snow, clucking out of her sheer misery. In winter 



-477] The Owl and the Nightingale 159 

thou singest angrily and mournfully: whereas in summer 
thou remainest dumb. It is all because of thy malicious 
spite that thou art unable to rejoice with us: for thou art 
almost consumed with envy, when happiness chances to come 
our way. Thy conduct is like that of the churlish man to 
whom all gladness is displeasing : grumbling and frowning 
come readily to him, if ever he sees that men are happy. He 
would like to see tears in the eyes of all : nor would he care 
though the wool-tufts were mere tangles of threads and hairs. 
And so, for thy part, dost thou behave : when snow lies deep 
both far and wide, and hardships are the lot of all, then dost 
thou sing from evening to dawn. But I all happiness with 
me bring: every creature is glad because of me, making merry 
at my coming, rejoicing even before I come. Blossoms burst 
forth and unfold themselves on the trees and in the meadows. 
The lily with her lovely hue welcomes me, as thou dost 
know : clad in beauty she doth bid me that I forthwith should 
fly to her. The rose, also, with tint of red, that peeps out of 
the briar-bush, bids me to sing for her sake one pleasing ditty. 
And this I do, both night and day : the more I sing, the more 
I may, giving delight with my songs. Yet never is my song 
too long : for when I see that men are pleased, I do not wish 
to tire them out. When that for which I came is done, I go 
away, and wisely go. When the thoughts of men are on har- 
vest sheaves, and autumn brown doth stain the leaves, then 
I go home and take my leave : for I care not for winter's 
spoil. W'hen I see hard weather coming I go home to my 
own land, taking with me love and thanks for my presence 
and my pains. Should I remain when my task is over ? Nay! 
why should I ? For he has neither wit nor wisdom that lingers 
where he is not needed." 

The Owl listened to this speech, storing up carefully every 
word : and afterwards she thought how best she might con- 
trive a fitting answer. For he who fears the tricks of pleading 
must ever take counsel with himself. 

"Thou dost ask me," said the Owl, "why I sing and cry out 
in winter. It is usual among good people — and has been so 
from the beginning of things — that every man should cherish 



160 The Owl and the Nightingale [477- 

his friends, rejoicing with them on certain occasions, with 
merry talk and kindly words at his own domestic board. 
Esp'^cially is this so at Christmas time: and then, when rich 
and poor, folk great and simple, sing their dance-songs by 
night and day, I do all I can to help them. But I think also of 
other things than of merry-making or mere singing : and here 
I have a fitting answer prompt and ready. For summer-time 
is all too rank : it is apt to lead a man's thoughts astray, so 
that he recks not of purity but gives himself up to wanton 
thoughts. No beast is there that restrains itself, but each doth 
ride upon the other : even the horses in the stud are filled with 
a wild longing for the mares. And thou thyself art much the 
same : for of wantonness is all thy song : and just before the 
breeding season thou art most passionate and excited. When 
thou hast thy will performed, then canst thou utter not a 
word : thou dost twitter like the titmouse, chucking with a 
husky voice. Thy note becomes worse than that of the hedge- 
sparrow that Hies near the ground amongst the trees : for 
when thy love-longing is over, then is thy singing over as well. 
In the summer season peasants rage and ramp and corrupt 
themselves, — but all the same, not for love. It is rather a mad 
impulse with the peasant : for when he has achieved his ob- 
ject, then his rashness soon departs, nor does his love any 

longer last. And thy mood is just the same : as soon as thou 
dost sit a-brooding, thou dost lose all thy tune. On thy twig 
the same things happen: when thou hast performed thy 
plea^iure, thy note at once becomes discordant. But when 
the long nights come, bringing frosts severe and hard, then 
for the first time it is seen where are those who are active ami 
brave. In bad times one discovers who does things and who 
holds back : one can see in times of need to whom one may 
assign hard duties. Then am I active : I frolic and sing, 
amusing myself with my chanting. I care nothing for any 
winter : I am no wretched flabby creature. Rather do I bring 
comfort to many beings who in themselves are without any 
strength, such as are anxious and very miserable, in eager 
longing for some warmth. For them I often sing the more, 
to lessen something of their pain. How now? Art thou cor- 
nered? Hast thou not been fairly beaten?" 



-608] The Owl and the Nightingale 161 

"Nay ! nay !" retorted the Nightingale, "Thou shalt hear 
yet another charge : this case of ours is not yet ripe for 
judgment. Be silent now and listen to me : for by making a 
mere allegation I shall break down thy whole defence." 

" But that would be illegal," said the Owl. " In accordance 
with thy request thou now hast made thy formal charge : and 
to that I have replied. But before we proceed to judgment 
I wish first to state a case against thee, as thou already hast 
dealt with me : and do thou answer if thou canst ! Tell me 
now, thou miserable thing ! art thou really of any use, apart 
from that shrill throat of thine ? Thou dost serve no other 
purpose, though thou art a clever babbler: for thou art tiny 
as well as frail, and thy defence is nothing great. What 
good art thou to the race of men ? no more indeed than a 
poor wren. From thee men get no good whatever, except 
that thou criest like a mad thing: and when this piping 
of thine is over, then art thou good for nothing else. Alfred 
in his wisdom said (and well he might, for true it is), ' No 
man is esteemed long for a mere song: for he is worthless 
who can do naught but sing.' Thou art therefore but a futile 
thing : in thee is nothing but empty talk. Then, too, thou 
art dark and filthy in colour: a little dirty ball is what thou 
art like. Thou hast no beauty, thou art not strong, thou art 
lacking in breadth and size as well. All qualities of beauty 
thou hast missed, and there is little that is good about thee. 
And another thing I lay to thy charge: thou art not attractive, 
not even clean. When thou comcst near the dwellings of men, 
where thorns and twigs are closely drawn, near to a hedge or a 
dense wood , thither thou goest, there thou dwellest, avoid- 
ing other and cleaner places. And when I chase mice in the 

night-time, there do I find thee, sitting amidst the thicket, 

among the nettles Yet thou dost reproach me with what 

I eat, saying that foul creatures are my food. But what dost 
thou eat, if the truth were known, apart from spiders and 
filthy flies — and worms as well, if thou mightest find them 
amidst the crevices of the bark of the trees? But I can render 
services of a useful kind : for I can protect the dwellings of 
men. And my services are very valuable, for I help with the 
food of men. I can catch mice in the barns: and also in church 

A. 11 



162 The Owl and the Nightingale [cos- 

duririg the hours of darkness. For the house of God is dear 
to me : I love to cleanse it of loathsome mice. Nor shall any 
vile creature enter there if I can get hold of it. And if it 
is my pleasure when I sing to refuse all other dwellings, I 
have still in the woods some mighty trees, with thick boughs 
that are never bare, covered over with ivy that is ever in leaf, 
and evergreen whether it snows or freezes. And there I have 
a splendid stronghold, warm in winter, in summer, cool : and 
when that dwelling stands bright and green, then of thine 
is nothing seen. Yet thou dost mention other matters: of my 
little ones thou pratest foolishly, saying that their nest is not 
clean. But the fault is common to many creatures : for the 
horse in its stable, the ox in its stall, both do follow their own 
inclinations. And little children in their cradles, whether of 
lowly or gentle birth, also do things in their early days which 
thej^ avoid in later years. Well ! can the infant really prevent 
it ? If it does wrong it cannot be helped. And there is as 
well an old-fashioned .saying, that 'need doth make the old 
wife trot.' But I have yet a further point to make, if thou wilt 
first come to this nest of mine to examine its structure ; for if 
thou art wise thou art able to learn. My nest in the middle 
is hollow and roomy, as is most cosy for my birds : but all 
around on the outside it is plaited, away from the inside of 
the nest. And thither they go in their need: and what thou 
complainest of, that I forbid. We take note of the dwellings 

of men, and ours arc made after their fashion. Now keep 

qu'iet, Dame Chatterbox ! thou hast never been in tighter 
corner. To what I have said thou canst never answer. Hang 
up thine axe ! it is time to end." 

The Nightingale, on hearing this speech, was almost at her 
wits' end: and eagerly she wondered to herself whether she 
knew anything else — whether she could do aught but sing — 
that might be useful in other affairs. To that question an 
answer was needed, or else she would be hopelessly out of the 
running: and hard indeed it is to strive against truth as well 
as right. The man whose heart is in great straits must ever go 
to work with cunning. Such a man must speak with dissimu- 
lation: he must trim his words and explain them away, if 



-732] The Owl and the Nightingale 163 

the mouth perchance can keep its secrets, so that the heart 
within is not revealed. For quickly can a word go astray, 
when what a man says is not what he feels : and quickly can 
a speech go Avrong, when tongue and heart do not agree. 
Yet nevertheless, in spite of this, here is encouragement for 
him who knows it : for never is a man's mind so keen as when 
in doubt what to do. Then first its cunning doth appear when 
the mind is in the greatest fear. For Alfred, long ago, uttered 
a saying, which even now is not forgotten : " When trouble is 
at its highest, then is the remedy nearest at hand." For the 
understanding grows in time of trouble, and because of the 
trouble doth it grow. Therefore never is a man devoid of 
counsel, unless his heart lacks understanding: but if he should 
lose that understanding then his pocket is picked of all its 
wisdom. If good sense he cannot retain, nowhere in his 
purse shall he find counsel. For Alfred in his wisdom said, 
ever speaking with truthful lips: "When trouble is at its 
highest, then is the remedy nearest at hand." 

Meanwhile the Nightingale, with all care and wisdom, had 
gone to work in circumstances both difficult and strained; well 
and wisely had 5ihe pondered, and had found a fitting answer 
in the midst of her perplexity. 

"Owl !" she said, " thou askest me if I can do aught but sing 
at certain seasons, diffusing happiness far and wide. Why 
dost thou ask about my accomplishments ? The one I possess 
is better than all thine : better the one song that I sing than 
all that thy tribe ever knew. And listen, and I'll tell thee 
why. Dost thou know why man was bom ? He was bom for 
the joy of heaven, where there is song and mirth eternal. And 
thither hastens every man who has skill in any good thing. 
Therefore men sing in holy church, and clerks as well 
their songs compose, so that one may remember through the 
songs, whither he is destined, there to be for ever: that 
he moreover may not forget heaven's joy, but, thinking 
thereon, he may attain it, thus taking heed of the Church's 
teaching how glorious is the bliss of heaven. Clerks and 
monks and canons as well, m places where there are religious 
houses, are wont to rise up at the hour of midnight in order 

11—2 



164 The Owl and the Nightingale [732- 

to sing of the light of heaven : and secular priests in their 
parishes take up the singing when daylight comes. And I 
help them as far as I can: with them I sing both night and 
day. They are the happier on my account, readier far to sing 
their chants. Thus do I caution men for their good that they 
should ever be glad at heart: I pray also that they might attain 
that self-same song that is eternal. Now, thou Owl, mayst 
thou sit and shrivel ! on this matter there can be no babbling. 
I am willing that we should go to judgment — before the very 
Pope of Rome. Yet, nevertheless, wait a bit ! thou shalt hear 
pronounced another sentence, which thou, for all England, shalt 
not refute. Why dost thou reproach me with my weakness, my 
lack of size as well as length, saying that I possess no strength 
because I am neither large nor long. Thou dost not know what 
thou sayest: mere lying words thou dost utter. For I am accom- 
plished, I have much skill : and that is why I am so bold.[, I 
can provide good sense and song-craft: I rely on no other power. 
For true it is, as Alfred said: ' Mere 'strength can do nothing 
against skill.' Often a little skill brings success, where great 
strength would have missed the mark. With little force, but by 
strategy, castle and city may be won. Ramparts by artifice are 
ove^thro^\^l, and brave knights hurled from the saddle. Mis- 
chievous strength is of little worth, [but wisdom never loses 
its value: and thou canst see in everything] that such wisdom 
is without rival. A horse, for instance, is stronger than a 
man. But, because it is without understanding, it bears great 
burdens on its back, leading withal great teams of horses; 
it suffers the smart of stick and spur : it stands fastened to 
the mill-doors : it does whatsoever it is commanded : and be- 
cause it is devoid of reason, it has, in despite of all its strength, 
to give obedience to little children. Man, in short, contrives, 
through his strength and sense, that nothing else is a match 
for him. Though the strength of all things were united in 
one, yet human skill would be still the more powerful : for 
man with his cunning remains master of all the creatures of 
earth. And so I do better with my one song than thou canst do 
•throughout the year. I am beloved by men for my skill : on 
account of thy violence thou art shunned. Dost thou reckon 



-85i] The Old and the Nightingale 165 

the worse of me because I have but a single craft ? If two 
men enter a wrestling match, and each of them plies the other 
hard : and while one of them knows a host of tricks which he 
is able to keep to himself, whereas the other has but one de- 
vice, which however comes off against every man, so that one 
after another is quickly thrown — why need he trouble about 
further tricks, when the one he has succeeds so well ? Thou 
sayest that thou canst perform many services, and that I am 
ever unlike thee in this. Put thy crafts 0.II together, yet is my 
wit alone the better. Often when hounds hunt down the foxes, 
the cat is left quite alone by himself, though he has but a 
single trick. Though the fox may know many devices, he has 
none so good as to lead him to hope he shall cheat every hound. 
Thus the fox knows of paths that are straight and devious : 
he also knows how to hang from a bough, thus making the 
hound lose the trail and return again back to the moorland. 
The fox, besides, can creep by the hedges, turn aside from 
his first line of flight, and double back quickly on his tracks 
again. Then is the scent of the hound quite done for: he 
knows not whether to go on or back, owing to the confusion 
of scents. And if the fox fails after all this manceuvring, in 
the end he goes to earth. Yet nevertheless, with all his 
trickery, though, too, he is cunning and very nimble, he 
cannot avoid losing his coat of red fur, however much he 
plans and- plots. The cat, on the other hand, has but one 
trick, whether on the hills or in the fenland: but then he is 
an excellent climber, and by means of climbing he saves his 
grey fur. And the same thing ma}' be said of me: better is 
my one craft than the dozen thou hast." 

"Stop! stop!" exclaimed the Owl, "thou proceedest in 
far too wily a fashion. All thy words thou dost colour, 
so that everything thou sayest seems to be true: thy whole 
utterance is unctuous, so plausible and specious that all 
who hear it suppose it to be true. But stay ! stay ! thou 
shalt yet be answered: and when thy lies are laid bare, the 
extent of thy falsehood shall plainly be seen. Thou sayest, 
for instance, that thou dost sing to mankind, teaching them 
of their journey hence, up to the chanting that lasts for 



166 The Owl and the Nightingale [85i- 

ever. But most strange it is that thou shouldst venture on 

such barefaced lies. Dost thou think to bring them so easily 

to God's kingdom — by mere singing? Nay! nay! they shall 

indeed find that before ever they come there, they must with 

manjr tears ask forgiveness for their sins. My advice is therefore 

that those who yearn for the king of heaven should get 

ready to weep rather than sing, since there is no man who 

is froe from sin. Therefore, a man, before he goes hence, 

must make due atonement with tears and with weeping, 

80 that what before was sweet may henceforth be bitter. And, 

God knows, I help mankind in this matter. I sing to men no 

foolishness. My song is of yearning and partly of lament, 

so that man in consequence may take heed to himself and 

bewail his transgressions: with my singing I urge him to 

groan for his misdeeds. And if thou art inclined to dispute 

this point, then I claim to weep better than thou dost sing : 

if what is right takes precedence over what is wrong, then 

bett(2r is my weeping than thy song. Some men there are who 

are good throughout, quite pure in heart; yet nevertheless 

they, too, long to depart this life. That they are here is but 

grief to them : for though they themselves are saved, around 

thera do they see naught but sorrow. Bitter tears they shed 

for other men, and for them they entreat the mercy of Christ. 

Thus do I help men in either case : my mouth has healing 

power of a twofold kind. The good I encourage in their 

yearning : for when they are filled with longing, to them do 

I sing. And sinful men I help as well, for I teach them where 

true misery lies. But I confute thee also on other grounds: 

for when thou art perched upon thy twig, thou enticest to 

canial lusts all who hear thee. The joys of heaven thou dost 

wholly neglect : thou hast no voice to utter such things. All 

thy song is of wantonness: in thee there is found no holiness: 

nor could any one take thy piping note for the singing of a 

priest within the church. But I will speak to thee on another 

matter, to see if thou canst reasonably explain it away. Why 

wilii thou not sing to other peoples by whom thy song is much 

more needed ? In Ireland thou dost never sing : nor dost thou 

ever visit Scotland. Why wilt thou not go across to Norway, 



-97i] The Owl and the Nightingale 167 

and sing to the men of Galloway? For there live men who 
have but little skill in songs of any sort. Why wilt thou not 
sing there to the priests, and in teaching them something of 
thy trills, show them by thy notes how the angels in heaven 
are wont to sing? Thou dost behave like a useless spring, that 
breaks forth near some rapid stream and lets the hill-side get 
quite parched, while running fruitlessly to the plain. But I go 
north as well as south: I am well-known in every land. East 
and west, far and near, I do my duty passing well, warning 
men in clamorous tones that they be not enticed by thy 
mischievous song. I urge men by my singing not to continue 
long in sin : I bid them cea.se from deceiving themselves : for 
better it is, that in this life they should weep, than be here- 
after companions of devils." 

The Nightingale by now was angry, and a little ashamed 
as well, for the Owl had reproached her for the place wherein 
she sat, uttering her cries — behind the dwelling, amongst the 

weeds She therefore remained deep in thought for a 

time: for well she knew in her heart of hearts, that anger doth 
rob a man of wisdom. Alfred the king had already also said 
it: "Seldom ends well the man disliked, seldom pleads well 
the angry man." For wrath stirs up the blood of the mind, 
so that it flows like a wild flood, overpowering all the mind 
and leaving to it naught but passion. The mind thus loses 
all its light, and can discern neither truth nor right. The 
Nightingale was aware of this, and she let her mood of anger 
pass. She could speak better in a good humour than by 
bandying words in a temper. 

"Owl!" said she, "now listen to me. Thou shalt trip: thy 
course is treacherous. Thou sayest that I flee behind the 
dwelling: that is true, the dwelling is ours. Where lord and 
lady lie together, there, near by, shall I sit and sing. Dost | 
thou suppose that wise men leave the high road for the muddy 
track ? Or that the sun no longer shines, though it be filthy 
within thy nest? Ought I then for a hollow log to forsake my 
proper place, and sing no longer near the bed where the lord 
and his beloved lie ? It is my duty, it is my law, ever to 
follow the highest things. But thou dost also boast of thy 



168 The Owl and the Nightingale [971- 

singing, that thou canst scream in fierce and mighty fashion: 
thou dost claim to direct mankind that they should bewail their 
transgressions. Yet were all men to make lament, crying out 
as if in torment, should they scream as thou art wont, they 
could but bring terror to their souls. A man must be calm, not 
given to wild words, even though he must bewail his sins,' 
But when Christ is praised, then shall he cry aloud, singing 
with ail his might. Hymn-singing in season can be neither 
too loud nor too long. Thou dost scream and lament, whereas 
I sing: thy note is tearful, mine gives delight. Ever may 
thou scream and weep to depart this life ! and may thou 
also scream so high as to burst both thine eyes! For which 
is the better of the two things, that a man be happy or 
else j)erturbed? So be it ever the lot of us two, that thou be 
sad and I be merry. But thou again dost ask why I go not 
hence, and sing my song in another land. No! what should 
I do amongst such people, to whom all happiness is unknown? 
That country is poor, it is not gracious, but mere wilderness, 
a barren land. Crags and rocks reaching up to heaven, snow 
and hail are common there. It is a horrible, an uncanny 
land: the inhabitants thereof are wild and wicked: they keep 
neither truce nor peace: nor do they care how they live. 
They eat raw fish, raw meat as well, tearing it to pieces like 
wolves. Milk they drink and also whey: they know not 
othenvise what to drink, having neither wine nor beer. 
They live, in truth, like wild bcjists: and they go clad in 
shag|Ty hides just as if they hailed from hell. If some good 
man to them came — as once upon a time one came from Rome, 
in order to teach them better manners and to leave their evil 
ways — he would do better to remain at home, for he would but 
waste his time. He could sooner teach a bear how to cany 
shield and spear, than he could bring a people so disorderly 
to listen to the song I sing. What should I do there with my 
singing? However long to them I sang, my song would be 
completely wasted : for neither halter nor bridle, instrument 
of steel nor of iron, can che^k them in their mad behaviour. 
But in a land which is pleasant and good, and where the 
people have gentle ways, there I turn my throat to account. 



-io9o] The Owl and the Nightingale 169 

for there I can render useful service: and glad tidings to 
them I bring, for I sing of the hymns of the Church. It was 
stated in the law of old time — and the wise saying still remains 
— that 'a man must plough and also sow where he expects to 
reap a harvest': for he is mad who sows his seed where no 
grass or blossom doth ever appear." 

The Owl was now angry, ready for strife : and after this 
speech she rolled her eyes. "Thou sayest that thou dost guard 
the dwellings of men where there are leaves and flowers that 
are fair: and where two lovers lie abed, well protected in 
each other's arms. Once didst thou sing — I know well whero 
— near to a dwelling. The lady thou wouldst tell of unlawful 
love: and, with song high and low, thou didst teach her to 
indulge a shameful and evil passion. Her lord, soon seeing 
how things were, set bird-lime and snares, and many other 
things in order to capture thee: and quickly didst thou come 
to the casement. Thou wert caught in a gin: thy shins paid 
thee out : and the doom decreed was none other than that 
thou shouldst be torn asunder by wild horses. Try, then, if 
thou canst agnin seduce either wife or maid : thy singing, 
forsooth, may prove so successful, that thou shalt flutter 
helplessly in a snare ! " 

The Nightingale, on hearing this, would have attacked with 
sword and spesr, had she but been a man: but since she could 
do nothing better, she took as her weapon her prudent tongue. 
"He fights well who talks well," so the song runs: and to her 
tongue she looked for help. " He fights well who talks well," 
as Alfred said. 

"What!" exclaimed the Nightingale, "sayest thou so, to 
put me to shame ? But the husband in the end had the worst 
of it. He was so jealous of his wife, that, to save his life, he 
could not bear to see a man speak with her, but his heart would 
break. He therefore locked her up in a certain dwelling — to 
her, a harsh and bitter treatment. And I had pity and com- 
passion on her: I felt sorry for her trouble, and amused her 
with my singing as much as I could, both early and long. And 
that was why the knight was wroth with me : he hated me 
out of sheer spite. He thrust on me his own disgrace, but it 



170 The Owl and the Nightingale [1090- 

all turned to his own injury. King Henry got to know of 
this — may Christ have mercy on his soul! Then did he 
outlaw the knight, who, through sheer spite and envy foul, 
had behaved so badly in that good king's land, as to 
have the little bird taken and condemned to death. That 
was an honour to all my kind: for the knight forthwith 
forfeited his happiness, and paid for me a hundred pounds. 
And, ever since, my birds have lived unharmed: they have 
lived in happiness and in joy, and have been of good cheer — 
as well they might. Thus was I so Avell avenged, that, ever 
since then, I speak more boldly; for since it happened so on 
one occasion, I am the blither ever more. And now I can sing 
wherever I will : nor durst any man annoy me. But as for 
thee, thou miserable thing! thou ghastly object! thou canst 
not find, thou knowest not of, a single hollow tree wherein to 
hide thee and so save thy skin. For girls and boys, masters and 
men all are keen on hurting thee. If they but see thee sitting 
quiet, they put stones in their pockets, and they pelt thee, 
and ill-treat thee, and break thine ugly bones to pieces. If 
thou art knocked over, or perchance, shot, then for the first 
time art thou useful. For then thou art hung upon a stick : 
and with thy grim and baggy body, and that hideous neck of 
thine, thou dost protect the cornfields from all animals. Alive 
and full-blooded, thou art useless : but as a scarecrow, thou 
art excellent. For where new seeds have been sown, there 
neither hedge-sparrow nor goldfinch, rook nor crow will ever 
venture, if thy carcase but hang near by. And where trees 
shall bloom in the spring-time, and young seeds burst forth 
and grow, there durst no bird venture to pluck them, if thou 
art hanging overhead. All thy life thou art sordid and vile: 
thou art useless except when dead. Now, indeed, canst thou 
know of a truth, that in life thine appearance is awesome: for 
even when thou art hanging dead, the birds that before cried 
out against thee, still remain in terror of thee. And rightly, too, 
are men hostile to thee : for thou dost sing ever of their 
troubles. All that thou singest, early or late, has to do with 
the misfortunes of men : and after thou haoi. cried out at night, 
men are mortally afraid of thee. Thou singest where someone 



-1206] The Owl and the NightiuQale 171 

is going to die: ever dost thou foretell some mischief or other. 
Thou singest before the loss of property, or of the ruin of a 
friend. Or else thou foretellest a house a-buming, an invasion 
of men, or the pursuit of a thief. Thou dost also predict a 
cattle-plague, that neighbours will suffer much distress, that 
a wife, again, shall lose her husband : or thou dost prophesy 
strife and disputes. Ever dost thou sing of the troubles of 
men: through thee they become both sad and miserable. Never 
at anytime dost thou sing except of some disaster or other. And 
this is the reason why thou art shunned, why thou art pelted 
and beaten with sticks and with stones, with turf and clods, so 
that no way of escape is left open for thee. Bad luck to such 
a herald amongst men, who is ever proclaiming futile secrets, 
bringing continually unwelcome tidings, and telling ever of 
unlucky things ! May the wrath of God Almighty and of all 
decent folk descend upon him ! " 

The Owl lost no time in making a rejoinder, stem and 
vigorous. " What !" she exclaimed, "art thou of priestly rank? 
or dost thou excommunicate, not being ordained ? For the 
priestly office thou art surely performing. I am not aware 
that thou wert ever a priest : I doubt if thou canst really sing 
mass, though thou knowest much of the Church's curse. It is 
because of thine ancient malice that thou hast cursed me this 
second time : and to this curse I can easily reply. 'Go to!' as the 
carter said. Why dost thou twit me with my foreknowledge, 
mine understanding and my power ? For most certainly I 
have much wisdom and am acquainted with all that the future 
holds. I have foreknowledge of famine and invasion : and I 
know if men are to have long life. I know, too, whether a 
wife shall lose her husband : also where malice and vengeance 
shall be rife. I can tell who is fated to be hanged or to come 
to some other vile end: and if men come together in battle, 
I am aware which side will be beaten. I know, also, if a pesti- 
lence is to fall on the cattle and whether the wild beasts shall 
lie still in death. I know if trees shall bear their blossom, if the 
cornfields also shall yield their increase. I am predict the burn- 
ing of houses : whether men shall run afoot or proudly ride. 
I know if ships will founder at sea, and if snow shall bind the 



172 The Owl and the Nightingale [120G- 

earth with Larsh fetters. And I know much more as well. I 
am well, skilled in bookish lore : I know more of Holy Writ 
than I will tell thee, for I go often to church and leam 
much wisdom. I know all the symbolical meanings, and many 
other things as well. If a man is to undergo the hue-and-cry, 
I know all about it before it happens. And so, because of my 
great knowledge, oft-times I sit, sad at heart and perturbed : 
for when I see trouble approaching to men, I cry aloud lustily, 
bidding them to be wary and to look to themselves. For 
Alfred said a wise thing which all men should treasure 
up: 'If thou seest [trouble] before it comes, it is robbed of 
wellnigh all its force.' And violent blows become the weaker, 
if one but cautiously takes heed of them; just as an arrow 
shall miscarry if thou seest it fly from the string. For then 
mayst thou well flinch and start aside, if thou seest it making 
for thee. If any man have fallen into disgrace, why shall he 
blame me for his trouble ? For although I see his trouble 
coming, it is not my fault that it comes. Or again, if thou 
shouldst see some blind man or other, who, unable to walk 
straight, pursues his erratic course to a ditch, and falling there- 
in, becomes covered with mud, dost thou suppose, although I 
see it all, that it happens any sooner because of me? And so 
it is with my foreknowledge : for when I am perched upon my 
bough, I know and discern very clearly, that on someone 
trouble is straightway coming. Shall he therefore, who knows 
nothing of it, put the blame on me because I know ? Shall 
he upbraid me for his misfortune, simply because I am wiser 
than he ? When I see that some trouble is coming, L call 
out lustily, bidding men earnestly to be on their guard, be- 
cause a cruel disaster approaches. But though I exclaim 
both loudly and quietly, it all comes about by the will of 
God. Why will men therefore complain of me, even though 
I annoy them with the truths I tell ? For though I warn 
them all the year round, the trouble is no nearer on that 
account. But to them I sing because I wish them to know, 
that when my hooting reaches their ears, some misfortune is 
hard at hand. For no man can be sure that he is exempt 
from the prospect and the fear of approaching trouble, even 



-1325] The Owl and the Nightingale 173 

though he cannot see it. Alfred therefore said very wisely, 
and his words were gospel truth, that 'every man, the better 
oif he is, the better he must look after himself.' And again: 
' Let no man trust too much to his wealth, though he be rich : 
for there is nothing so hot that it docs not grow cool, nothing 
so white that it does not soil, nothing so beloved that it does 
not become hateful, nothing so merry that it does not become 
angry. But every thing that is not eternal, and all worldly 
happiness, must pass away.' Now thou mayst clearly see that 
thy talk is foolish; for all that thou sayest to my shame, the 
same turns ever to thine undoing. However things go, in 
every bout, thou dost trip thyself up by thine own tricks. All 
that thou sayest to put me to shame, adds to mine honour 
in the end. Unless thou make a better beginning, thou shalt 
win naught but disgrace for thyself." 

The Nightingale, meanwhile, sat still and sighed: anxious 
was she — and with good reason — seeing in what way the 
Owl had spoken and managed her case. She was anxious 
and much puzzled as to what her reply should be: but 
nevertheless she bethought herself. "What!" she exclaimed, 
"Owl ! art thou mad? Thou art boasting of a strange wisdom, 
and thou wert ignorant from whence it came, unless by 
witchcraft it came to thee. And of witchcraft, thou wretch, 
thou must cleanse thyself, if thou art anxious to remain 
amongst men : otherwise must thou flee the country. For all 
those, who were skilled in witchcraft, were cursed of old by the 
mouth of the priest: as thou art still, since thou hast never 
forsaken witchcraft. I told thee this a short while ago: and 
thou didst ask in scornful tone, if I were ordained priest. 
But the cursing of thee is so common a thing, that were no 
priest to be found in the land, thou wouldst still be an outlaw. 
For every child calls thee vile, and every man, a despicable owl. 
I have heard — and true it is — that he who knows rightly 
what things are coming, as thou sayest is true of thee, must 
be well versed in star-lore. But what dost thou know of the 
stars, thou miserable object! except that thou beholdest them 
from afar? — as doth many a beast and man, who knows naught 
about such matters. An ape, for instance, may gaze on a book, 



174 The Owl and the Nightingale [1326- 

turn its leaves, and close it again : but it is unable, all the 
same, to make head or tail of what is written. And though 
in like fashion thou gaze at the stars, still art thou none the 
wiser for it. And yet, thou vile thing! thou dost chide and 
reproach me viciously for singing near to the dwellings of 
men and for teaching their Avivos to break their vows. Thou 
liest for certain, thou loathsome object! Wedlock through me 
was never impaired. Yet true it is that I sing and declaim, 
where ladies and fair maidens bo : and true is it also that of 
love ] sing. For a virtuous wife may, in her married state, 
love her own husband better far than any philanderer : and 
a maid may take a lover without loss of honour, with true 
affection loving him to whom she grants her favour. Such 
love as this I teach and commend : this is the burden of all 
my utterance. But if a wife be weak of will — for women are 
soft-hearted by nature— so that through the wiles of a fool, 
who doth eagerly entreat with many a sad sigh, she happen to 
go astray and do^wrong on occasion, shall I in that matter be 
held to blame? ^If women love foolish courses, am I to be 
scolded for their misdeeds?) Though a woman be bent on a 
secret love, I cannot nevertheless refrain from singing. A woman 
may frolic as she will — either honestly or viciously : and as a re- 
sult of my song, she may do as she will — either well or badly. 
For there is naught in the wide world so good that it may not 
do ev:il if turned to wrong uses. Gold and silver, for instance, 
are always valuable: yet with them may be bought adultery 
and other like crimes. Weapons, again, are useful in keeping 
the peace: yet men with them are unlawfully slain in lands 
where thieves make use of them. And so it is with ray 
singing: though it be chaste, it may yet be abused and 
connected with foolish and evil deeds. But must thou, wretched 
creature, speak evil of love? Of whatever kind it be, all love 
is pure between man and woman, unless it be stolen : for then 
it is impure and also corrupt. May the wrath of the Holy 
Kood descend upon those who thus transgress the laws of y 
nature! Strange is it that they go not mad. Yet, indeed, they 
do : for mad are they who go to brood without a nest. Woman 
is but frail of body : and since carnal lust is hard to crush, no 



-1449] The Old and the Nightingale 175 

wonder is it that it persists. But though fleshly lusts make 
women err, they are not all completely lost, who trip at the 
stumbling-block of the flesh. For many a woman, who has 
gone wrong, rises again out of the slough. Nor are all sins quite 
the same: they are, indeed, of two different kinds. One is the 
fruit of carnal lust: the other, of the spiritual nature. For 
whereas the flesh doth lead men to drunkenness, to sloth and 
also to wantonness, the spirit goes wrong through malice and 
anger, and through the joy felt at another's shame. It also 
gapes after more and more, recking but little of mercy 
and grace: and, ascending on high through haughtiness, it 
proudly disdains what is below. Tell me truly, if thou canst,, 
which is the worse, the flesh or thf^ sTu'rif,? Thou mayst 
answer, if thou wilt, that the flesh is the less evil: for 
many a man is pure of body, who in his heart is of devilish 
nature. No man must therefore cry out on a woman, upbraid- 
ing her for the lusts of the flesh: but such may he blame for 
wantonness as indulge in the greater sin of pride. Yet if 
through my singing I cause wife or maid to fall in love, I 
would defend the cause of the maid — if thou canst grasp my 
meaning aright. Listen now and I'll tell thee why — the reason 
complete from beginning to end. If a maid doth love privily, 
she stumbles and falls according to nature: for though she 
frolic for a time, she has not gone very far astray. From her 
sin she may esc-ape lawfully through the rites of the Church, 
and afterwards have her lover as husband, free from all ques- 
tioning: and to him she may go in the full light of day, whom 
before she had received under cover of darkness. A young maid 
knows nothing about such things: her young blood doth lead 
her astray, and some foolish fellow entices her to evil with all 
the tricks at his command. He comes and goes, he commands 
and entreats: he pays her attention, then neglects her, and thus 
does he woo her oft and persistently. How can the girl help 
but go WTong? She never knew what things were: and so she 
thought to make experiment, and learn for certain of the sport 
that tames high spiiits. And when I see the drawn expression 
which love gives to the young maid, I cannot refrain, out of 
sheer pity, from singing to her some song of cheer. Thus do 



176 The Owl and the Nightingale [1449- 

I teach them by my singing, that love of this kind doth not 
last long. For my song is but short-lived: and love merely 
alights upon such girls: it soon passes, and the liot passion 
quickly subsides. With them I sing for a while: I beo-in 
high and end low: and after a time, I cease completely. 
The maid doth know, when I have finished, that love is 
just like my singing: for it is but a brief excitement that soon 
comes and soon goes. The girl through me doth understand 
things; and her unwisdom is to wisdom turned. She sees 
clearly from my song, that unbridled love doth not last long. 
But this I would that thou shouldst know; hateful to me are 
the lapses of wives. And if a married woman will take heed 
of me, she will see that I do not sing in the breeding season. 
Though marriage bonds may seem to be harsh, yet a wife 
should ignore the teaching of fools. And to me it appears 
a most astounding thing, how a man could find it in his 
heart to wrong another's wife. For it means one of two al- 
ternatives; there can be no other possibility. Either, on the 
one hand, the husband is doughty; or else he is feeble and of 
no account. If he is honoured and courageous, no man, who 
is wise, will wish to shame him, especially through his wife: 
for he will stand in .awe of the good man's anger, and the 
payment of that penalty which shall deprive him of future 
longings. And even if that terror is not present with him, yet 
it is wicked and senseless in a high degree, to injure in this way 
a worthy man by alluring his partner away from him. If, on. 
the other hand, the husband is futile, and feeble as well, in all 
his relations, how could there exist any affection whatsoever, 
when such a boor makes love to her ? How can there be any sort 
of love, when he doth lie abed with her? From this thou art 
able clearly to see, that in one case there is sorrow, in the other, 
disgrace, as a result of stealing another man's wife. For if 
the man of courage be her husband, thou canst look out 
for trouble when lying by her side. And if the husband be 
good for nothing, what pleasure can be derived from the 
deed? If thou dost remember who is her bed-fellow, thou 
mayst with loathing pay for her favour. I know not how any 
man with self-respect may after that make advances to her. 



-1568] The Owl and the Nightingale 177 

If he but thinks by whom he lay, all his love will forthwith 
vanish." 

The Owl was glad to hear this charge: for she thought that 
the Nightingale, though arguing well to begin with, had in 
the end now come to grief. And so she exclaimed, "Now do I 
see that maidens are thy peculiar care: v/ith them thou dost 
side,defending them and praising them beyond all reason. The 
married women to me do turn: to me they make their com- 
plaints : for it happens, oft and frequently, that man and wife 
are at variance. Therefore that man is guilty of sin, who takes 
delight in loose living: who spends on a woman all that he has, 
making love to one without claim on him, and leaving at home 
his lawful wife, with bare walls and an empty house, leaving 
her, too, but thinly clad and poorly fed, without food and 
without clothing. And when he comes home to his wife again, 
she dare not utter a single word: he storms and shouts like 
a madman — and this is all the kindness he brings. All that she 
does merely annoys him : all that she says is utterly wrong. 
And often when she does nothing amiss, her reward is a blow 
from his fist in her teeth. There is no man living who cjinnot 
send wrong his wife by such treatment. Such a one may be 
so often maltreated, that on occasion she may consult her own 
pleasure. Lo! God knows ! she cannot help it even if she makes 
a cuckold of him. For it happens, time and again, that the wife 
is tender and gentle, fair of face and of good figure : and this 
but makes it the more unjust that he should shower his love 
on one who is not worth a hair of her head. And men of this 
sort are very plentiful, so that a wife is unable to behave 
properly. Nor may any man speak to her: for he thinks that she 
is about forthwith to betray him, if she but looks at a man or 
speaks him fair. And so he puts her under lock and key, as a 
result of which, marriage ties are oft-times broken. For if she 
is brought to such a pass, she does what before she h;ul not 
thought of. Accursed be he who talks too much, if such wives 
proceed to avenge themselves. Concerning this matter, wives 
to me make their complaint: and sadly enough do they grieve 
me. My heart, indeed, is wellnigh breaking when I behold 
their great distress. With them I weep bitter tears, and pray 
A. 12 



178 The Owl and the Nightingale [i568- 

that Christ shall have mercy on them, so that he may quickly 
succour the wife, and send to her a better husband. And, more- 
over, I can tell thee this, that to what I have said, thou shalt 
find no answer, even to save thy skin : for all thy talking shall 
now be futile. Full many a merchant and many a knight loves 
and cherishes his wife aright; as does many a husbandman 
too. And then the goodwife behaves accordingly, rendering 
him ser\'ice at bed and at board, with gentle deeds and 
kindly words, anxiously striving how to please him. The hus- 
band goes away amongst other people, bent on supplying the 
needvS of them both : and then is the goodwife sad at heart, 
because of her husband's anxious joumeyings. She sits a-sigh- 
ing, full of sad longings, and with sore vexation at her heart. 
Because of her husband she spends days that are troublous 
and watchful nights: and long to her the time doth appear, 
for every step seems a mile. While others around her lie 
w^rapt in sleep, I alone am listening outside the house : for 
well do I know her sad heart, and I sing at night for her benefit. 
And my song for her sake I turn partly into mourning. Thus 
of her sorrow I take a share, and that is why she welcomes me. 
I give to her what help I can, because she tries to do what Ls 
right. But thou hast sorely angered me, so that my heart is 
almost crushed, dnd with difficulty may I speak. And yet 
I will continue my charge. Thou saycst that I am hateful to 
men, that every man is angry with me, and, attacking me 
with stones and sticks, they beat me and break me all to pieces : 
and, moreover, when they have me slain, that they hang me 
high upon their hedges to scare away magpies and also crows, 
from the seeds that are sown near by. Though this be true, it 
is also true that I render them service; for them indeed did 
I shed my blood. I do them good by my death— which for thee 
is very difficu^, For although thou liest dead and shrivelling 
up, thy death nevertheless serves no purpose. I know not m 
the least what use thou art : for thou art only a miserable 
thing. But if the life is shot out of me, yet even so may I do 
some good. I can be fastened to a small stick in the thick-set 
of a wood, so that man can attract and capture little birds, 
and thus obtain through my help roast meat for his food. 



-1688] The Owl and the Nightingale 179 

But neither alive nor dead hast thou been useful to man. 
I know not why thou dost rear thy young: neither living nor 
dead are they any good." 

The Nightingale heard what had been said ; and hopping 
on to a twig in blossom, she perched herself higher than before. 
"Owl !" she said, "now take good heed. I will plead with thee 
no further, since here thy usual lore doth fail thee. Thou 
boastest that thou art hated by men, that every creature is 
angry with thee, and with yells and shouts thou dost bewail 
that thou art accursed. Thou saycst that boys catch thee and 
hang thee aloft upon a stick: that they also pluck thee and 
shake thee to pieces : while some of them make a scarecrow 
of thee. To me it seems that thou dost forfeit the game: for 
thou art boasting of thine own shame. Thou dost appear to be 
making a surrender, for thou boastest of thine own disgrace." 
When she had thus spoken, the Nightingale alighted in a 
lovely spot: and after having tuned her voice, she sang so 
shrilly and so clearly, that both far and near her notes were 
heard. And therefore presently to her came thrush and throstle 
and woodpecker, and other birds as well, both great and small. 
And since they assumed that she had beaten the Owl, they 
also cried aloud and sang many a tune. In just the same way 
does one cry shame on the gambler who plays at dice and 
loses the game. 

The Owl, on hearing this, forthwith exclaimed: "Hast thou 
indeed summoned an army? And dost thou, wretched crea- 
ture, wish to fight with me? Nay! nay! thou art not strong 
enough for that. What are they crjnng who have thus come 
hither? Methinks thou art bringing an army against me. But 
ye shall all learn, before ye fly hence, what is the strength of 
my particular tribe. For all with hooked bills and claws sharp 
and crooked, all belong to my own race, and would come if I 
but asked them. The cock himself, that valiant warrior, he 
must naturally side ^vith me ; for we both have voices clear, 
and both sit under the clouds at night. If I but raise the 
hue-and-cry against you, I shall bring up so mighty a host that 
your pride shall have a fall. I care not a straw for you all! 
Nor shall there be left by evening time one wretched feather 

12—2 



180 The Owl and the Nightingale [less- 

amongst you all. But it was agreed by us both when ^e came 
hither, that we should abide by that decision, which lawful 
judgment would give to us. Dost thou then wish to break 
this agreement? Judgment, I presume, seems too hard for 
thee: and since thou durst not await the verdict, thou dost 
wish, wretched creature, now to fight and quarrel ! Yet- I 
would give you all this piece of advice, before raising the 
hue-and-cry against you, that you should have done with 
your fighting, and fly away quickly and at once. For by these 
very talons of mine, if ye wait here for my ruthless horde, ye 
shall sing another tune and curse all fighting. For there is 
no one amongst you so brave as to endure the sight of my 
face." Thus with all boldness spake the Owl: for although 
she would not have gone so quickly after her host, yet she 
wished to reply in such terms as these. For many a man, 
feeble enough with spear and shield, yet causes his foe in the 
field to sweat out of sheer cowardice; so brave are his words, 
his countenance so dread. The Wren, however, because of her 
skill in singing, came in the morning to the help of the Night- 
ingale : for though her voice was but small, she had a throat that 
was good and shrill, and her songs were a source of pleasure 
to many. Moreover she was reckoned a bird most wise, for 
although she had not been bred in the woodland, she was 
brought up among the race of men, and from them she derived 
her wisdom. She could speak wherever she pleased — before 
the king if she wished. "Listen!" she said, "and let me speak! 
What! do you wish to break the peace, and to put the king to 
this disgrace? But he is neither dead nor infirm; and to both 
of you shall come trouble and shame, if in his land ye commit 
a breach of the peace. Therefore, have done and come to an 
agreement! Proceed at once to hear judgment; and let the 
verdict end this pica, as was arranged at an earlier stage." 

"I am quite willing," said the Nightingale, "but not. 
Mistress Wren, because of thine argument, but on account 
of ray o^vn law-abiding nature. I do not want lawlessness to 
win in the end: nor am I afraid of any judgment. I have 
promised — true it is — that Master Nicholas, with his wisdom, 
should be our judge: and I still hope that he will act. But 



-1794] The Owl and tlie Nightingale 181 

where should we be able to find him?" The Wren replied, as 
she sat in her lime-tree, "What! did ye not know of his 
abode ? He dwells at Portisham, a place in Dorset, in an outlet 
near the sea: and there be delivers many lawful judgments, 
he composes and writes many wise sayings, and indeed through 
his sayings and also his writings things are the better even 
in Scotland! To seek him out is an easy task, for he has 
but one dwelling — much to the shame of the bishops, and of 
all who have heard of him and his work. Why will they not 
arrange in their o^vn interests, that he should frequently be 
with them, teaching them out of his store of wisdom ? Why 
not give him livings in several places, so that he might often 
be at their service?" 

"Certainly," quoth the Owl, "that is quite true. These great 
men are much to blame, in passing over this excellent man — 
so well instructed in many things — and in bestowing livings 
indiscriminately, while him they hold in but light esteem. 
Towards their own kin they are more generous: they grant 
livings to little children. Thus their good sense shall convict 
them of error, in that Master Nicholas still suffers neglect. 
But let us however go now to him, for with him our judgment 
is ready." 

"Yes, let us do so," said the Nightingale, "but who is there 
to present our statement, and to speak before this judge of 
ours?" 

"On that point," replied the Owl, "I can set your mind 
at ease: for I can repeat every word from beginning to end: 
and if perchance I seem to go wrong, do thou protest and 
pull me up." And having thus spoken, they went on their 
way without any supporters, until they arrived at Portisham. 
But as to how they fared in the matter of judgment, I can 
tell you nothing: this is the end of this particular story. 