The temperature of accessible surfaces may be hot whilst the toaster is operating.
Never cover the toaster with anything. If covered, the toaster and/or items
covering the toaster, may ignite.
1. Read all instructions carefully before using your new toaster. Save these
instructions.
2. Always use this toaster with a power outlet of the voltage (A.C. only) marked on
the back of the appliance.
3. DANGER Do not operate toaster if:
i) the cord or plug is split, melted or damaged.
ii) the appliance has malfunctioned.
iii) the appliance has been damaged in any manner.
If any of the above incidents occur, return the toaster to the nearest authorized service
center for examination, repair or adjustment.
4. DANGER Never cover the toaster with anything. This will cause the toaster to
overheat, causing irreparable damage and may interfere with the automatic on/
off functions. If covered, the toaster and/or items covering the toaster, may ignite.
5. DANGER Bread can burn. Do not use the toaster near flammable materials. Do
not place the toaster close to curtains or other materials that could easily catch
fire. The toaster should not be left unattended when in operation.
6. DANGER Do not under any circumstances immerse the toaster, mains cord or
mains plug in water or any other liquid.
7. WARNING Incorrect operation and improper use may damage the toaster or
parts thereof, and cause severe personal injury.
8. WARNING When operating the toaster, use loading handle and buttons only
as some surfaces will become hot whilst the toaster is in use.
9. WARNING Never force bread into the toasting slots. Never toast slices of
bread that have been buttered. Take extra care when toasting items that contain
sugar, jam, preserves, raisins or other bits of fruit, as there is a risk of overheating.
Don’t use bent, damaged or broken bread slices in your toaster as it may get
jammed in the slot.
10. WARNING Never attempt to remove bread or other items which have become
jammed in the slots without first unplugging the toaster from the mains supply.
Be careful not to damage the internal mechanism or heating elements when
removing the jammed items.
11. WARNING Never use metal objects to remove jammed items from the toaster.
12. CAUTION The power plug must be removed from the outlet before the
emptying the crumb tray.
13. CAUTION The toaster should not be left unattended while in operation.
Unplug the appliance from mains before cleaning, immediately after use, when
moving it to storage and when not in use.
years old.
15. This toaster is not intended for use by persons (including children) with reduced
physical, sensory or metal capabilities or lack of experience and knowledge,
unless they have been given supervision or instruction concerning use of the
toaster in a safe way by the person responsible for their safety, and understand
the hazards involved.
16. Children should be supervised not to play with the toaster.
17. Always turn the power off at the power outlet before you insert or remove the
power plug. Remove by grasping the plug - do not pull on the cord.
18. This appliance is intended for non-commercial, indoors use only. Do not use this
appliance for anything other than its intended use.
19. Always use the appliance on a stable, secure, dry and level surface.
20. This toaster is not intended to be operated by means of an external timer or
separate remote-control system.
21. Wait for the toaster to cool before moving. Carry only by the outer side panels.
22. Close supervision is necessary when any appliance is used by or near children.
23. Never lift the toaster by placing your fingers inside or near the bread slot.
24. The toaster should not be used whilst under a cupboard or close to a wall as
scorching of the cupboard or may occur as a result.
25. It is important that crumbs are not allowed to build up inside the toaster, as this is
unhygienic and may cause a fire hazard. Crumbs can be easily removed by simply
sliding open the crumb tray located at the rear lower section of the toaster. Once
the crumb tray has been removed from the toaster, it may be emptied. Always
ensure the toaster is completely cool and disconnected from the mains before
carrying out this operation. Never touch the internal parts of the toaster with a
brush or any other implement.
26. Do not place your toaster on or near a hot gas flame, electric element, heated
oven or any hot surface.
27. Do not place the toaster on top of any other appliance.
28. Do not permit the mains supply cord or plug to touch the hot toaster or other hot
objects, or allow the power cord to lay across the toaster.
29. Do not allow the power cord of this appliance to hang over the edge of a table or
bench top.
30. Do not use harsh or abrasive cleaning agents or any sharp instruments for
cleaning the unit. When the unit is cool to touch, the outside surface may be
wiped clean with a soft, damp cloth and then dried thoroughly.
31. Immediately unplug the toaster from mains power if malfunction occurs.
32. Any appliance that has been dropped or damaged should not be used until
examined by an authorized service center.
33. If the mains supply cord is damaged, it must be replaced by the manufacturer, its
service agent or a similarly qualified person in order to avoid a hazard.
34. After use, allow the toaster to cool down approximately 30 minutes before
handling or cleaning the appliance.
35. Always ensure that the toaster has completely cooled down before storing.
POWER SUPPLY CORD
1. Do not attempt to modify the power cord or plug in any way.
2. A short power supply cord is provided to reduce the risk of becoming entangled
in or tripping over a longer cord.
3. If the power supply cord is too short, do not use an extension cord. Have a
qualified electrician or serviceman install an outlet near the appliance.
NOTE: Neither Westinghouse nor the retailer can accept any liability for damage
to the product or personal injury resulting due to failure to observe the electrical
connection procedures.
Carefully unpack the toaster.
2. Carefully remove packaging from inside the toaster slots and around the power
cord. Straighten the power cord and do not remove warning labels.
3. To remove any dust that may have accumulated during packaging, you may wipe
down the external sections of the appliance with a soft dry cloth.
4. Do not use harsh detergents or abrasive cleansers on any part of the toaster.
5. Do not use toaster near combustible materials such as paper, curtains etc.
6. The toaster should not be used whilst under a cupboard or close to a wall as
scorching of the wall or cupboard may occur. Position toaster accordingly.
DANGER Never cover the toaster with anything. This will cause the toaster to
overheat, causing irreparable damage and may interfere with the automatic on/off
functions. If covered, the toaster and/or items covering the toaster, may ignite.
DANGER Bread can burn. Do not use the toaster near flammable materials. Do not
place the toaster close to curtains or other materials that could easily catch fire. The
toaster should not be left unattended when in operation.
DANGER Do not under any circumstances immerse the toaster, mains cord or
mains plug in water or any other liquid.
REHEAT FUNCTION (Refer to Pg 5)
If left for too long after toasting, the bread may become cold. It may be reheated
by pressing the loading handle down and pressing the reheat button to activate the
reheat function.
DEFROST FUNCTION (Refer to Pg 5)
When using bread straight from the freezer, the defrost function may be used. Set
the browning control to the desired browning position and press the loading handle
down. After the loading handle has been pressed down, press the defrost button.
Ensure to watch the bread in case of burning.
CANCEL BUTTON (Refer to Pg 5)
The Cancel button will immediately stop your toasting cycles. Once pressed, all
elements will cease heating and your bread/bagel will pop back up.
HIGH LIFT LEVER (Refer to Pg 5)
The high lift lever is designed to lift breads, bagels and crumpets higher than the
original preset level allowing extraction of small slices of bread or crumpets with ease.
Once the toasting cycle has finished and the lever has popped up to its standard
preset position, simply push the lever further upwards for additional lift and extract
your toasted items
Operate the toaster twice on a light setting with no bread to disperse the initial
element burning smell. Make sure the room is well ventilated. Once this step has
been completed, do not use the toaster without bread slices occupying toaster
slots as overheating may occur.
2. Place two slices of bread in the bread slots and press the handle down until it
latches. The bread will be lowered into the toaster and the toasting cycle will
begin.
NOTE: The handle will not latch if the unit is not connected to the mains, and may not
latch if the browning control is set to its minimum position.
3. If the toast starts to burn or smoke before it has popped up, toasting can be
stopped by pressing the ‘Cancel’ button.
4. If you should find that the toast is not dark enough you may wish to toast the bread
again. Turn the browning control down and keep a careful eye on the toaster to
ensure that the toast does not burn. Remember to increase the browning control
setting for subsequent operations. If the toast is too dark, reduce the browning
control before toasting the next slice.
NOTE: Remember that dry or thin slices will toast quicker than moist or thick slices.
Using a lower browning control setting for thinner slices is recommended. When
toasting two slices at the same time, try to use the same size and consistency of bread
to achieve equal browning.
5. When toasting has finished the handle will rapidly rise to the fully raised position.
The toasted bread can now be removed and the toaster is ready to recommence
toasting. Should the toast not be accessible from the standard pop up position,
the extra lift function may be used. Simply push the lever upwards to activate the
high lift function and remove toasted items.
6. Avoid using the toaster on the maximum browning control setting. Most breads
toast well below the 4 setting.
7. When toasting smaller slices of bread, use of the high lift lever function may be
required. Once the toasting cycle has finished and the lever has popped up to its
standard preset position, simply push the lever further upwards for additional lift
and extract your toasted items.
8. For Reheat, Cancel and Defrost functions, please refer page 6.
DANGER Never cover the toaster with anything. This will cause the toaster to
overheat, causing irreparable damage and may interfere with the automatic on/off
functions. If covered, the toaster and/or items covering the toaster, may ignite.
DANGER Bread can burn. Do not use the toaster near flammable materials. Do not
place the toaster close to curtains or other materials that could easily catch fire. The
toaster should not be left unattended when in operation.
WARNING Never force bread into the toasting slots. Never toast slices of bread
that have been buttered. Take extra care when toasting items that contain sugar, jam,
preserves, raisins or other bits of fruit, as there is a risk of overheating. Don’t use bent,
damaged or broken bread slices in your toaster as it may get jammed in the slot.
WARNING When operating the toaster, use loading handle and buttons only as
some surfaces will become hot whilst the toaster is in use. 
Toasting is a combination of cooking and drying the bread.
2. Moisture levels differ from one bread to another which can result in varying
toasting times.
3. For slightly dry bread, use a lower setting than normal.
4. For fresh bread or whole wheat, use a higher setting than normal.
5. Breads with very uneven surfaces will require a higher setting.
6. Thickly cut pieces of bread (including crumpets) may take significantly longer to
toast since more moisture must be evaporated from the bread before toasting
can occur. Very thick pieces may require two cycles.
7. When toasting raisin or other fruit breads, remove any loose raisins from the
surface of the bread before placing into the toaster. This will help prevent pieces
from falling into the toaster, sticking on the guard wire in the slot or burning
inside the toaster.
8. Uneven toasting is usually due to bread slices of uneven thickness.
WARNING Never force bread into the toasting slots. Never toast slices of bread
that have been buttered. Take extra care when toasting items that contain sugar, jam,
preserves, raisins or other bits of fruit, as there is a risk of overheating. Don’t use bent,
damaged or broken bread slices in your toaster as it may get jammed in the slot.
Ensure the power is set to OFF and the unit has been allowed to cool. Be sure
to remove the mains plug from the power outlet before proceeding to clean your
toaster
1. The exterior of your toaster may be cleaned with a soft damp cloth and polished
with a dry soft cloth if necessary. Do not use abrasive cloths or cleaning agents.
2. Dispose of crumbs by sliding out the removable crumb tray and emptying.
Regular cleaning of the crumb tray is required as accumulation of crumbs may
pose a fire hazard.
3. Additional cleaning and/or disposal of crumbs may be achieved by turning the
appliance upside down over the sink whilst gently shaking. Any additional debris
or crumbs should fall out and can be washed down the sink.
DANGER Never immerse the toaster, mains cord or mains plug in water or any
other liquid.
WARNING Never attempt to remove bread or other items which have become
jammed in the slots without first unplugging the toaster from the mains supply. Be
careful not to damage the internal mechanism or heating elements when removing
the jammed items.
WARNING Never use metal objects to remove jammed items from the toaster.
CAUTION The
Nothing in this Warranty affects the Consumer’s rights under the Australian
Consumer law. The benefits to the Consumer under this Warranty are in addition
to the rights and remedies of the buyer under any Consumer Guarantees. The
Australian Consumer Law requires that we confirm that:
Our goods come with guarantees that cannot be excluded under the Australian
Consumer Law. You are entitled to a replacement or refund for a major failure
and for compensation for any other reasonably foreseeable loss or damage. You
are also entitled to have the goods repaired or replaced if the goods fail to be of
acceptable quality and the failure does not amount to a major failure.
2. Subject to Clause 1, the Seller warrants that Westinghouse branded products will
be free of manufacturing defects and will perform to the Seller’s specifications
subject to the following clauses.
3. The benefit of this Warranty extends only to the owner of the property in which
the Products manufactured or supplied by the Seller are installed and used by the
owner for the duration of the Warranty Period.
4. The Warranty commences on the date of the purchase of the product and
continues for the benefit of the Owner for the Warranty Period. If within the
Warranty Period a manufacturing defect is discovered in the Product, or the
Product fails to perform to the Seller’s specifications as a result of some defect in
material or workmanship in the Product, then the Seller will at its own discretion:
a.) Repair or replace the Product at the cost of the Seller, including but not
limited to labour and travel costs. Goods repaired or replaced under this
Warranty will be warranted for the remaining period of the Warranty.
b.) Refund the purchase price paid by the consumer.
5. The Warranty does not apply to Product that :
a.) Has failed due to excessive wear and tear beyond what is considered to be
reasonable.
b.) Has been misused or neglected.
c.) Has been damaged accidentally or by acts of God including fire and flooding.
d.) Has been used or operated contrary to operating or maintenance instructions.
e.) Has been damaged by the Consumer or a third party authorised to act for the
consumer in transit from the Sellers store to the Consumer.
6. In order to make a claim under the Warranty, the Owner must, where possible
return the goods to the Seller’s store at the Owner’s cost. Proof of purchase must
be supplied in all cases.
7. The seller will examine any returned Products and if the Seller determines that
there is an apparent defect through no fault of the Owner, the Seller will:
a.) Make note of the Owner’s contact details including the Owner’s telephone
number which the owner can be contacted during business hours, postal
address and e-mail address. 
) Make note of the defects reported by the Owner.
c.) Take back the defective goods from the owner and determine within a
reasonable time through dialogue with the Seller whether the goods are
defective.
d.) Advise the owner within a reasonable time frame whether it accepts or
rejects the Product claim.
e.) If the Seller accepts the return of the Product, the Seller must arrange to have
i) The Product repaired or,
ii) Replace the damaged or faulty Product or,
iii) Refund the purchase price.
8. The Seller will not accept any returned Product which has not been returned
strictly in accordance with this Warranty.
9. For the purpose of this Warranty:
a.) Australian Consumer Law means the law as set out in Schedule 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010 (Cth).
b.) Consumer means the Purchaser of goods from the seller.
c.) Consumer means a Consumer as that term is set out in section 3 of the
Australian Consumer Law.
d.) Consumer Guarantees means the guarantees under the Australian Consumer
Law.
e.) Implied terms means any guarantees, conditions, warranties or other terms
implied by any Australian Commonwealth, State or Territory laws, (excluding
the Australian Consumer Law) or the law of any other jurisdiction.
f.) Owner has the meaning set out in clause 3.
g.) Warranty means this warranty.
h.) Product means the Product/s bought by the Owner from the Seller that fall
under this warranty.
i.) Warranty Period means:
i) In relation to Cast Iron Cookware: 3 Year Limited Warranty.
ii) In relation to Non-Stick Cookware: 3 Year Limited Warranty
iii) In relation to Cooking Utensils: 3 Year Limited Warranty
iv) In relation to Knives/Knife Block Sets: 3 Year Limited Warranty
v) In relation to Stainless Steel Cookware: 10 Year Limited Warranty
vi) In relation to Chopping boards: 1 Year Limited Warranty
vi) In relation to Small Appliances: 1 Year Limited Warranty