TRANSLATION 

In a haunt remote of a certain valley I heard an Owl and 
a Nightingale hold great debate. Their dispute was stern and 
strenuous and stubborn: quiet at times, then loud again. 
Each bird raged against the other, uttering many a malicious 
thought: each one spake of the other's character the worst 
things that she could devise. But above all, they made their 
plaints of each other's singing: and this they did in downright 
terms. 

The Nightingale began the pleading, in the corner of a 
spinney, seated on a twig that was rich with blossom, in 
a close thick hedge with reeds and sedge entangled. Re- 
joicing she sang with many a trill and quaver, so that her 
notes seemed to come from hai'p or pipe — from harp or pipe, 
not from living throat. 

Near by there stood an old tree-stump, where the Owl was 
wont to sing her "hours." It was all overgrown with ivy, and 
was the dwelling-place of the Owl. 

The Nightingale beheld the Owl, and looked her up and 
down in scorn: for she thought but ill of her opponent, and, 
indeed, all men reckon her loathsome and foul. "Monster," 
said she, "away with thee! I am the worse for seeing thee. 
And, truly, the sight of thine ugliness often brings my song 
to untimely end. My heart doth sink, my tongue foils me, 
when thou dost thrust thyself upon me. I had rather spit 
than sing on hearing that gurgling noise of thine." 

The Owl waited till evening fell, and then she could contain 
herself no longer: for her heart had become so swollen, that she 
was almost breathless with rage. And after a while she spake 
these words: "What dost thou think now of my singing? 
Dost thou suppose that I cannot sing, though I know naught 
of all thy trilling ? Time and again thou docst me wrong, 
saying things both annoying and shameful. If I but held thee 



-no] The Owl and the Nightingale 153 

on my foot, (would that such a thing might happen !) and thou 
wert away from that twig of thine, thou shouldst sing another 
tune!" 

To this the Nightingale gave answer: "If I can avoid coming 
into the open, and find protec':ion against hard weather, I care 
nothing for all thy threats. If I keep quiet in my hedge, 
I reck naught of what thou sayest. Well do I know that thou 
art merciless to those who cannot protect themselves against 
thee : and that, wherever thou canst, thou dost attack 
little birds in cruel and wanton fashion. Therefore art- thou 
hated by all manner of birds, who are wont to chase thee out 
of their midst, crying and screeching in hot pursuit of thee. 
Even the very titmouse would gladly tear thee to pieces I 
Then thou art loathsome to behold: and loathsome art thou 
in many ways. Thy body is short : thy neck is thin : thy head 
is bigger than all thy body. Thine eyes also are coal-black 
and broad, just as if they were painted with woad: and with 
them thou glarest, as if thou wouldst devour all that thou 
mayst clutch by means of thy claws. Thy bill is strong and 
sharp and hooked, like to an awl crooked in shape : and with 
this bill thou clackest continually — which, indeed, is one of thy 
songs. But thou dost also threaten this body of mine: with 
thy claws thou wouldst like to crush me. More fitting would 
it be for thee to feed on the frog [that sits underneath the 
cogwheel of the mill]: snails and mice and other foul creatures 
arc thy natural and proper food. Thou lurkest by day and 
fiiest at night, showing by this thou art unnatural. And thou 
art horrible and dirty as well, — I refer to thy nest and to thy 
foul brood, in which thou dost rear a most filthy family. Well 
knowest thou what they do therein: they defile their nest up 
to their chins, sitting meanwhile as if they were blind. And 
of this matter men make a proverb: 'Cursed be the creature 
that defiles its own nest.* Once upon a time a falcon bred: 
his nest he did not well protect: and one day thither thou 
didst steal, laying therein thy filthy Qgg. In course of time 
the eggs were hatched, and from them came little nestlings, 
to which the falcon brought some food. He watched his nest: 
he saw them eat: and the outside of the nest he saw had been 



154 The Owl and the Nightingale [iio~ 

defiled. Then was he angry with his brood : he screamed aloud 
a^ he sternly scolded them. 'Tell me,' quoth he, 'who have 
done this thing? for it is quite against your nature. A hateful 
trick has been played on you. Tell me if ye knew aught 
about it.' Then sprnke one and spake another: 'Truly it was a 
brother of ours, yonder fellow with the big head. Bad luck 
to that head of his! Cast him out forthwith, and break his 
neck!' Whereupon the falcon, believing his brood, took the 
ugly bird by the middle, and threw it down from the wild- 
wood bough to where magpie and crow plucked it to pieces. 
And of this fable men make a parable, though the story be 
not complete. For thus it is with the worthless man, who has 
come from vicious stock. Although he live among noble folk, 
he will always betray from whence he sprang: he shows that 
he came from an addle ^%<g, though he dwell in a splendid 
nest. An apple may roll from the parent tree, on which it 
once grew along with others: yet, though it roll far, it will 
always show from whence it came." 

Such was the speech of the Nightingale, and after making 
this long indictment, she sang in tones that were loud and 
piercing, just as though one had plucked the resonant strings 
of a harp. Meanwhile the Owl had been listening, keeping 
her eyes fixed to the ground: and as she sat, puffed out and 
swollen, it was as if she had swallowed a frog. For she knew 
and was well aware, that the Nightingale sang in mockery 
of her: and yet she had her answer ready. "Why then wilt 
thou not fly into the open, arid show which of us two has the 
brighter colouring, the fliirerhue?" "No!" [replied the Night- 
ingale] "for thou hast claws that are very sharp, and I am not 
anxious that thou shouldst claw me. Thou hast talons mighty 
and strong, with which thou dost squeeze like a pair of tongs. 
Thou didst think, as do birds of thy feather, to lead me astray 
with plausible words. But I would not follow thine advice : 
I knew well thou wouldst advise me badl}'. Shame on thee 
for thy false counsel, for now thy deceit is made plain to all. 
Cover thy treachery from the light, and hide what is wrong 
behind the right. When thou dost wish to practise evil, take 
good heed it is not seen ; for treachery brings but shame and 



-225] TJie Owl and the Nightingale 155 

hatred, if it is obvious and plain to all. With thy wicked tricks 
thou hast not succeeded, for I am wary and can dodge thein : 
nor is thy daring of any avail, for my skill in fighting is 
greater than thy brute strength. I have,besides,on this branch 
of mine, a splendid stronghold broad and long; and, as the 
wise man says, 'He fights well who flies well.' But let us now 
stop this squabbling, for such talking serves no purpose: and 
let us get on with a proper trial, using fair and friendly words. 
For though we may not be agreed, we can conduct this case 
in better fashion, by observing decency and law, and with 
friendly argument, free from strife and violence: so that each 
may say whatever he will, with due regard to law and reason." 

"But," said the Owl: " Who is there to settle our difference? 
Who can and will give lawful judgment?" "I know well," the 
Nightingale answered, "of that there need be no discussion. 
Master Nicholas of Guildford is the man: for he is wise and 
cautious of speech, prudent as well in giving judgment, and 
an enemy to vice of every kind. Then, too, he has taste in 
matters of song: he knows who sings well, and who sings 
badly. He can distinguish the wrong from the right, the 
things of darkness from things of the light." 

The Owl for a time pondered on this, and at length she 
replied as follows: "I am willing that lie should judge: for 
although somewhat wild in days gone by — fond of the night- 
ingales, and other creatures, too, gentle and neat — I know 
that now his ardour is cooled. He will not be befooled by thee, 
so that, for old time's sake, he may prefer thy cause to mine. 
Thou art unable so to please him, that he for thy sake will 
utter folsc judgment. Now he is settled and steady of mind: 
follies for him have no attraction. He delights no longer in 
flighty ways: he will adopt the course th.-it is straight." 

The Nightingale, meanwhile, was ready for action: her wit 
was drawn from many sources. "Owl!" she said, "tell me 
truly: why behavest thou in unnatural fashion? Thou singest 
at ni^ht and not by day : and thy whole song is a lament, 
with which thou dost terrify all who hear thy noise. Thou 
shriekest and hootest to thy mate in a way that is awful to 
hear: so that to men, both wise and foolish, it seems not that 



156 The Owl and the Nightingale [225- 

thou singest but that thou dost weep. Then, too, thou fliest 
at night and not by day: at this I wonder, and well I may. 
For everything that shuns what is right loves the darkness 
and hates the light. And everything that inclines to evil 
likes the darkness for its deed. A wise saying there is, which, 
though unpolished, is often heard on the lips of men, for King 
Alfred said and wrote it: 'A man shuns that which knows 
him to be foul,' And so it is, I suppose, with thee: for ever dost 
thou fly at night. And another thing I have in mind : thou 
hast at night the clearest vision, whereas by day thou art 
stone-blind, seeing neither tree nor stream. In the day-time 
thou art blind and sightless: and of this, men make a parable. 
'So it is with the wicked man who sees naught to any good 
purpose, and is so full of evil tricks that no man is able to 
deceive him. He knows well the way of darkness and avoids 
the way of light.' Thus do all of thy kindred: of the light 
they have no care." 

The Owl listened for a while in a state of great vexation. 
At length she spake: "Thou art called the Nightingale: but 
'Chatterbox' would describe thee better, for thou hast too 
much to say. Let thy tongue now have a rest! Thou dost 
suppose that the whole day is thine: but let me now have a 
chance. Keep quiet and let me speak: and I shall be revenged 
on thee. And listen how I can clear myself with truthful words 
without ado. Thou sayest that I hide by day: and this I in no 
way deny. But listen and I'll tell thee why — the whole reason 
for the same. I have a strong and sturdy beak, good claws as 
well both sharp and long, as befits one of the hawk-tribe. It 
is my joy, my delight as well, that I live iu accord with 
Nature : and for this no man can blame me. In me it is 
plainly seen that by Nature's laws I am so fierce: and that is 
why I am hated by the little birds, that fly near the ground 
and in the thickets, as they twitter around me, uttering their 
cries and bringing their flocks in force against me. But I 
prefer to take a rest, sitting quietly in my nest: for I should 
be no better oft* if I put them to rout with scolding or 
with chattering, or by using bad language as the shepherds 
do. Nor do I care to bandy words with such spit-fires: and 



-355] The Owl and the Nightingale 157 

therefore I keep them at a distance. There is a wise proverb 
in common use among men, that 'one should not rail against 
a fool nor vie in yawning with an oven': while once I heard 
that Alfred had said 'Be not present where railing and ruffling 
are rife: let fools quarrel and go thy way.' And I am wise and 
follow this counsel. Moreover Alfred said in another place a 
proverb that is also familiar: 'He that has to do with what 
is foul, never comes off entirely clean.' Dost thou then think 
the hawk is any the worse, though crows cry out against him 
in the marshes, and though they draw near with their cawing 
as if they were about to attack him? He, for his part, takes 
the wise course: he flies away, and lets them caw." 

"But thou dost charge me with other things: thou s'lyest 
that I cannot sing, that my one theme is lamentation and 
that it is awful to hear. This is not true: I sing smoothly, 
with full melody and in loud tones. Thou dost regard every 
song as dreadful that is different from thy piping tones. As 
fur my note, it is bold p^nd masterful — much like the sound of 
a great horn ; while thine is like that of a tiny pipe fashioned 
out of a reed unripe. My singing indeed is better than thine. 
Thou dost chatter like an Irish priest: but I sing in the 
evening at the proper time, afterwards at bed-time, and again 
at midnight : and once more I begin my song when I behold 
the dawn, the morning-star rising from afar. Thus I do good 
with my song, warning men to their advantage. But thou 
dost sing all the night long, from evening until dawn : and thy 
song is ever the same while darkness lasts. Thy wretched 
throat keeps up its noise, never ceasing night nor day : and 
with this din thou assailest the ears of all who dwell around, 
making thy song so cheap withal, that men reckon nothing of 
it. For every pleasure may last so long that in the end it 
ceases to please : whether it be note of harp or pipe or bird, 
each shall displease if kept up too long. Be the song ever so 
meiTy, it shall become quite distasteful if it lasts beyond the 
proper time. For it is true— Alfred said it, and it may also be 
read in books — ' Every thing may lose its virtue by excess and 
superfluity.' With pleasure thou mayst glut thyself, and a 
surfeit brings on loathing: so every joy may cease to be if 



.; 



158 The Owl and the Nightingale [355- 

ever maintained the same. And this is true, with one 
exception — that is the kingdom of God, which alone remains 
dear and ever the same. Though continually thou take from 
its fulness as from a basket, yet it remains full to overflowing. 
This is the marvel of the kingdom of God, that for ever it gives, v 
and for ever it remains the same." 

"But thou dost bring forward another shameful charge — 
that I am defective in my eyes. Thou sayest that because I fly 
at night, I am unable to see by day. But there thou liest ! for it 
is clear that I have good eyesight, since no darkness is so dim 
as to prevent my seeing. Thou dost suppose that I cannot see, 
because I do not fly by day. But the hare lies low throughout 
the day,and nevertheless he sees quite well. If the hounds per- 
chance come out against him, he darts away quickly, winding 
his way along narrow tracks, turning to account his ready tricks, 
hopping and leaping in swiftest fashion as he makes his way 
to a place of covert. This he could not do, despite his eyes, 
unless with them he saw things clearly. And I can see as 
well as the hare, though by day I sit and lurk. When bold 
men c^o to war and make their expeditions {av and near, when 
they overrun many peoples, performing at night their good 
pleasure, then I follow i_n_their train and fly by night in their 
company." 

Al] this the Nightingale took to heart, and pondered long 
as to what she should answer. She could not refute what had 
just been said, for the Owl had spoken wisely and well: and. 
annoyed that she had carried the argument so far, she feared 
lest her reply should somehow miscarry. In spite of this she 
spake out boldly; for he is wise who, undismayed, presents a 
brav€! front to his foe, so that he through cowardice be not 
found wanting. For the foe who will yield if thou turnest 
not away, will yet become bold if thou shouldst flee. If he 
sees thou art no craven, he from a boar will become a tame 
pig. And therefore, though the Nightingale was shaken, yet 
she spake up bravely. 

"Owl !" said she, "why behavest thou so, ever chanting in 
winter thy song of woo ? Thy song is like that of a hen 
in the snow, clucking out of her sheer misery. In winter 



-477] The Owl and the Nightingale 159 

thou singest angrily and mournfully: whereas in summer 
thou remainest dumb. It is all because of thy malicious 
spite that thou art unable to rejoice with us: for thou art 
almost consumed with envy, when happiness chances to come 
our way. Thy conduct is like that of the churlish man to 
whom all gladness is displeasing : grumbling and frowning 
come readily to him, if ever he sees that men are happy. He 
would like to see tears in the eyes of all : nor would he care 
though the wool-tufts were mere tangles of threads and hairs. 
And so, for thy part, dost thou behave : when snow lies deep 
both far and wide, and hardships are the lot of all, then dost 
thou sing from evening to dawn. But I all happiness with 
me bring: every creature is glad because of me, making merry 
at my coming, rejoicing even before I come. Blossoms burst 
forth and unfold themselves on the trees and in the meadows. 
The lily with her lovely hue welcomes me, as thou dost 
know : clad in beauty she doth bid me that I forthwith should 
fly to her. The rose, also, with tint of red, that peeps out of 
the briar-bush, bids me to sing for her sake one pleasing ditty. 
And this I do, both night and day : the more I sing, the more 
I may, giving delight with my songs. Yet never is my song 
too long : for when I see that men are pleased, I do not wish 
to tire them out. When that for which I came is done, I go 
away, and wisely go. When the thoughts of men are on har- 
vest sheaves, and autumn brown doth stain the leaves, then 
I go home and take my leave : for I care not for winter's 
spoil. W'hen I see hard weather coming I go home to my 
own land, taking with me love and thanks for my presence 
and my pains. Should I remain when my task is over ? Nay! 
why should I ? For he has neither wit nor wisdom that lingers 
where he is not needed." 

The Owl listened to this speech, storing up carefully every 
word : and afterwards she thought how best she might con- 
trive a fitting answer. For he who fears the tricks of pleading 
must ever take counsel with himself. 

"Thou dost ask me," said the Owl, "why I sing and cry out 
in winter. It is usual among good people — and has been so 
from the beginning of things — that every man should cherish 



160 The Owl and the Nightingale [477- 

his friends, rejoicing with them on certain occasions, with 
merry talk and kindly words at his own domestic board. 
Esp'^cially is this so at Christmas time: and then, when rich 
and poor, folk great and simple, sing their dance-songs by 
night and day, I do all I can to help them. But I think also of 
other things than of merry-making or mere singing : and here 
I have a fitting answer prompt and ready. For summer-time 
is all too rank : it is apt to lead a man's thoughts astray, so 
that he recks not of purity but gives himself up to wanton 
thoughts. No beast is there that restrains itself, but each doth 
ride upon the other : even the horses in the stud are filled with 
a wild longing for the mares. And thou thyself art much the 
same : for of wantonness is all thy song : and just before the 
breeding season thou art most passionate and excited. When 
thou hast thy will performed, then canst thou utter not a 
word : thou dost twitter like the titmouse, chucking with a 
husky voice. Thy note becomes worse than that of the hedge- 
sparrow that Hies near the ground amongst the trees : for 
when thy love-longing is over, then is thy singing over as well. 
In the summer season peasants rage and ramp and corrupt 
themselves, — but all the same, not for love. It is rather a mad 
impulse with the peasant : for when he has achieved his ob- 
ject, then his rashness soon departs, nor does his love any 

longer last. And thy mood is just the same : as soon as thou 
dost sit a-brooding, thou dost lose all thy tune. On thy twig 
the same things happen: when thou hast performed thy 
plea^iure, thy note at once becomes discordant. But when 
the long nights come, bringing frosts severe and hard, then 
for the first time it is seen where are those who are active ami 
brave. In bad times one discovers who does things and who 
holds back : one can see in times of need to whom one may 
assign hard duties. Then am I active : I frolic and sing, 
amusing myself with my chanting. I care nothing for any 
winter : I am no wretched flabby creature. Rather do I bring 
comfort to many beings who in themselves are without any 
strength, such as are anxious and very miserable, in eager 
longing for some warmth. For them I often sing the more, 
to lessen something of their pain. How now? Art thou cor- 
nered? Hast thou not been fairly beaten?" 



-608] The Owl and the Nightingale 161 

"Nay ! nay !" retorted the Nightingale, "Thou shalt hear 
yet another charge : this case of ours is not yet ripe for 
judgment. Be silent now and listen to me : for by making a 
mere allegation I shall break down thy whole defence." 

" But that would be illegal," said the Owl. " In accordance 
with thy request thou now hast made thy formal charge : and 
to that I have replied. But before we proceed to judgment 
I wish first to state a case against thee, as thou already hast 
dealt with me : and do thou answer if thou canst ! Tell me 
now, thou miserable thing ! art thou really of any use, apart 
from that shrill throat of thine ? Thou dost serve no other 
purpose, though thou art a clever babbler: for thou art tiny 
as well as frail, and thy defence is nothing great. What 
good art thou to the race of men ? no more indeed than a 
poor wren. From thee men get no good whatever, except 
that thou criest like a mad thing: and when this piping 
of thine is over, then art thou good for nothing else. Alfred 
in his wisdom said (and well he might, for true it is), ' No 
man is esteemed long for a mere song: for he is worthless 
who can do naught but sing.' Thou art therefore but a futile 
thing : in thee is nothing but empty talk. Then, too, thou 
art dark and filthy in colour: a little dirty ball is what thou 
art like. Thou hast no beauty, thou art not strong, thou art 
lacking in breadth and size as well. All qualities of beauty 
thou hast missed, and there is little that is good about thee. 
And another thing I lay to thy charge: thou art not attractive, 
not even clean. When thou comcst near the dwellings of men, 
where thorns and twigs are closely drawn, near to a hedge or a 
dense wood , thither thou goest, there thou dwellest, avoid- 
ing other and cleaner places. And when I chase mice in the 

night-time, there do I find thee, sitting amidst the thicket, 

among the nettles Yet thou dost reproach me with what 

I eat, saying that foul creatures are my food. But what dost 
thou eat, if the truth were known, apart from spiders and 
filthy flies — and worms as well, if thou mightest find them 
amidst the crevices of the bark of the trees? But I can render 
services of a useful kind : for I can protect the dwellings of 
men. And my services are very valuable, for I help with the 
food of men. I can catch mice in the barns: and also in church 

A. 11 



162 The Owl and the Nightingale [cos- 

duririg the hours of darkness. For the house of God is dear 
to me : I love to cleanse it of loathsome mice. Nor shall any 
vile creature enter there if I can get hold of it. And if it 
is my pleasure when I sing to refuse all other dwellings, I 
have still in the woods some mighty trees, with thick boughs 
that are never bare, covered over with ivy that is ever in leaf, 
and evergreen whether it snows or freezes. And there I have 
a splendid stronghold, warm in winter, in summer, cool : and 
when that dwelling stands bright and green, then of thine 
is nothing seen. Yet thou dost mention other matters: of my 
little ones thou pratest foolishly, saying that their nest is not 
clean. But the fault is common to many creatures : for the 
horse in its stable, the ox in its stall, both do follow their own 
inclinations. And little children in their cradles, whether of 
lowly or gentle birth, also do things in their early days which 
thej^ avoid in later years. Well ! can the infant really prevent 
it ? If it does wrong it cannot be helped. And there is as 
well an old-fashioned .saying, that 'need doth make the old 
wife trot.' But I have yet a further point to make, if thou wilt 
first come to this nest of mine to examine its structure ; for if 
thou art wise thou art able to learn. My nest in the middle 
is hollow and roomy, as is most cosy for my birds : but all 
around on the outside it is plaited, away from the inside of 
the nest. And thither they go in their need: and what thou 
complainest of, that I forbid. We take note of the dwellings 

of men, and ours arc made after their fashion. Now keep 

qu'iet, Dame Chatterbox ! thou hast never been in tighter 
corner. To what I have said thou canst never answer. Hang 
up thine axe ! it is time to end." 

The Nightingale, on hearing this speech, was almost at her 
wits' end: and eagerly she wondered to herself whether she 
knew anything else — whether she could do aught but sing — 
that might be useful in other affairs. To that question an 
answer was needed, or else she would be hopelessly out of the 
running: and hard indeed it is to strive against truth as well 
as right. The man whose heart is in great straits must ever go 
to work with cunning. Such a man must speak with dissimu- 
lation: he must trim his words and explain them away, if 



-732] The Owl and the Nightingale 163 

the mouth perchance can keep its secrets, so that the heart 
within is not revealed. For quickly can a word go astray, 
when what a man says is not what he feels : and quickly can 
a speech go Avrong, when tongue and heart do not agree. 
Yet nevertheless, in spite of this, here is encouragement for 
him who knows it : for never is a man's mind so keen as when 
in doubt what to do. Then first its cunning doth appear when 
the mind is in the greatest fear. For Alfred, long ago, uttered 
a saying, which even now is not forgotten : " When trouble is 
at its highest, then is the remedy nearest at hand." For the 
understanding grows in time of trouble, and because of the 
trouble doth it grow. Therefore never is a man devoid of 
counsel, unless his heart lacks understanding: but if he should 
lose that understanding then his pocket is picked of all its 
wisdom. If good sense he cannot retain, nowhere in his 
purse shall he find counsel. For Alfred in his wisdom said, 
ever speaking with truthful lips: "When trouble is at its 
highest, then is the remedy nearest at hand." 

Meanwhile the Nightingale, with all care and wisdom, had 
gone to work in circumstances both difficult and strained; well 
and wisely had 5ihe pondered, and had found a fitting answer 
in the midst of her perplexity. 

"Owl !" she said, " thou askest me if I can do aught but sing 
at certain seasons, diffusing happiness far and wide. Why 
dost thou ask about my accomplishments ? The one I possess 
is better than all thine : better the one song that I sing than 
all that thy tribe ever knew. And listen, and I'll tell thee 
why. Dost thou know why man was bom ? He was bom for 
the joy of heaven, where there is song and mirth eternal. And 
thither hastens every man who has skill in any good thing. 
Therefore men sing in holy church, and clerks as well 
their songs compose, so that one may remember through the 
songs, whither he is destined, there to be for ever: that 
he moreover may not forget heaven's joy, but, thinking 
thereon, he may attain it, thus taking heed of the Church's 
teaching how glorious is the bliss of heaven. Clerks and 
monks and canons as well, m places where there are religious 
houses, are wont to rise up at the hour of midnight in order 

11—2 



164 The Owl and the Nightingale [732- 

to sing of the light of heaven : and secular priests in their 
parishes take up the singing when daylight comes. And I 
help them as far as I can: with them I sing both night and 
day. They are the happier on my account, readier far to sing 
their chants. Thus do I caution men for their good that they 
should ever be glad at heart: I pray also that they might attain 
that self-same song that is eternal. Now, thou Owl, mayst 
thou sit and shrivel ! on this matter there can be no babbling. 
I am willing that we should go to judgment — before the very 
Pope of Rome. Yet, nevertheless, wait a bit ! thou shalt hear 
pronounced another sentence, which thou, for all England, shalt 
not refute. Why dost thou reproach me with my weakness, my 
lack of size as well as length, saying that I possess no strength 
because I am neither large nor long. Thou dost not know what 
thou sayest: mere lying words thou dost utter. For I am accom- 
plished, I have much skill : and that is why I am so bold.[, I 
can provide good sense and song-craft: I rely on no other power. 
For true it is, as Alfred said: ' Mere 'strength can do nothing 
against skill.' Often a little skill brings success, where great 
strength would have missed the mark. With little force, but by 
strategy, castle and city may be won. Ramparts by artifice are 
ove^thro^\^l, and brave knights hurled from the saddle. Mis- 
chievous strength is of little worth, [but wisdom never loses 
its value: and thou canst see in everything] that such wisdom 
is without rival. A horse, for instance, is stronger than a 
man. But, because it is without understanding, it bears great 
burdens on its back, leading withal great teams of horses; 
it suffers the smart of stick and spur : it stands fastened to 
the mill-doors : it does whatsoever it is commanded : and be- 
cause it is devoid of reason, it has, in despite of all its strength, 
to give obedience to little children. Man, in short, contrives, 
through his strength and sense, that nothing else is a match 
for him. Though the strength of all things were united in 
one, yet human skill would be still the more powerful : for 
man with his cunning remains master of all the creatures of 
earth. And so I do better with my one song than thou canst do 
•throughout the year. I am beloved by men for my skill : on 
account of thy violence thou art shunned. Dost thou reckon 



-85i] The Old and the Nightingale 165 

the worse of me because I have but a single craft ? If two 
men enter a wrestling match, and each of them plies the other 
hard : and while one of them knows a host of tricks which he 
is able to keep to himself, whereas the other has but one de- 
vice, which however comes off against every man, so that one 
after another is quickly thrown — why need he trouble about 
further tricks, when the one he has succeeds so well ? Thou 
sayest that thou canst perform many services, and that I am 
ever unlike thee in this. Put thy crafts 0.II together, yet is my 
wit alone the better. Often when hounds hunt down the foxes, 
the cat is left quite alone by himself, though he has but a 
single trick. Though the fox may know many devices, he has 
none so good as to lead him to hope he shall cheat every hound. 
Thus the fox knows of paths that are straight and devious : 
he also knows how to hang from a bough, thus making the 
hound lose the trail and return again back to the moorland. 
The fox, besides, can creep by the hedges, turn aside from 
his first line of flight, and double back quickly on his tracks 
again. Then is the scent of the hound quite done for: he 
knows not whether to go on or back, owing to the confusion 
of scents. And if the fox fails after all this manceuvring, in 
the end he goes to earth. Yet nevertheless, with all his 
trickery, though, too, he is cunning and very nimble, he 
cannot avoid losing his coat of red fur, however much he 
plans and- plots. The cat, on the other hand, has but one 
trick, whether on the hills or in the fenland: but then he is 
an excellent climber, and by means of climbing he saves his 
grey fur. And the same thing ma}' be said of me: better is 
my one craft than the dozen thou hast." 

"Stop! stop!" exclaimed the Owl, "thou proceedest in 
far too wily a fashion. All thy words thou dost colour, 
so that everything thou sayest seems to be true: thy whole 
utterance is unctuous, so plausible and specious that all 
who hear it suppose it to be true. But stay ! stay ! thou 
shalt yet be answered: and when thy lies are laid bare, the 
extent of thy falsehood shall plainly be seen. Thou sayest, 
for instance, that thou dost sing to mankind, teaching them 
of their journey hence, up to the chanting that lasts for 



166 The Owl and the Nightingale [85i- 

ever. But most strange it is that thou shouldst venture on 

such barefaced lies. Dost thou think to bring them so easily 

to God's kingdom — by mere singing? Nay! nay! they shall 

indeed find that before ever they come there, they must with 

manjr tears ask forgiveness for their sins. My advice is therefore 

that those who yearn for the king of heaven should get 

ready to weep rather than sing, since there is no man who 

is froe from sin. Therefore, a man, before he goes hence, 

must make due atonement with tears and with weeping, 

80 that what before was sweet may henceforth be bitter. And, 

God knows, I help mankind in this matter. I sing to men no 

foolishness. My song is of yearning and partly of lament, 

so that man in consequence may take heed to himself and 

bewail his transgressions: with my singing I urge him to 

groan for his misdeeds. And if thou art inclined to dispute 

this point, then I claim to weep better than thou dost sing : 

if what is right takes precedence over what is wrong, then 

bett(2r is my weeping than thy song. Some men there are who 

are good throughout, quite pure in heart; yet nevertheless 

they, too, long to depart this life. That they are here is but 

grief to them : for though they themselves are saved, around 

thera do they see naught but sorrow. Bitter tears they shed 

for other men, and for them they entreat the mercy of Christ. 

Thus do I help men in either case : my mouth has healing 

power of a twofold kind. The good I encourage in their 

yearning : for when they are filled with longing, to them do 

I sing. And sinful men I help as well, for I teach them where 

true misery lies. But I confute thee also on other grounds: 

for when thou art perched upon thy twig, thou enticest to 

canial lusts all who hear thee. The joys of heaven thou dost 

wholly neglect : thou hast no voice to utter such things. All 

thy song is of wantonness: in thee there is found no holiness: 

nor could any one take thy piping note for the singing of a 

priest within the church. But I will speak to thee on another 

matter, to see if thou canst reasonably explain it away. Why 

wilii thou not sing to other peoples by whom thy song is much 

more needed ? In Ireland thou dost never sing : nor dost thou 

ever visit Scotland. Why wilt thou not go across to Norway, 



-97i] The Owl and the Nightingale 167 

and sing to the men of Galloway? For there live men who 
have but little skill in songs of any sort. Why wilt thou not 
sing there to the priests, and in teaching them something of 
thy trills, show them by thy notes how the angels in heaven 
are wont to sing? Thou dost behave like a useless spring, that 
breaks forth near some rapid stream and lets the hill-side get 
quite parched, while running fruitlessly to the plain. But I go 
north as well as south: I am well-known in every land. East 
and west, far and near, I do my duty passing well, warning 
men in clamorous tones that they be not enticed by thy 
mischievous song. I urge men by my singing not to continue 
long in sin : I bid them cea.se from deceiving themselves : for 
better it is, that in this life they should weep, than be here- 
after companions of devils." 

The Nightingale by now was angry, and a little ashamed 
as well, for the Owl had reproached her for the place wherein 
she sat, uttering her cries — behind the dwelling, amongst the 

weeds She therefore remained deep in thought for a 

time: for well she knew in her heart of hearts, that anger doth 
rob a man of wisdom. Alfred the king had already also said 
it: "Seldom ends well the man disliked, seldom pleads well 
the angry man." For wrath stirs up the blood of the mind, 
so that it flows like a wild flood, overpowering all the mind 
and leaving to it naught but passion. The mind thus loses 
all its light, and can discern neither truth nor right. The 
Nightingale was aware of this, and she let her mood of anger 
pass. She could speak better in a good humour than by 
bandying words in a temper. 

"Owl!" said she, "now listen to me. Thou shalt trip: thy 
course is treacherous. Thou sayest that I flee behind the 
dwelling: that is true, the dwelling is ours. Where lord and 
lady lie together, there, near by, shall I sit and sing. Dost | 
thou suppose that wise men leave the high road for the muddy 
track ? Or that the sun no longer shines, though it be filthy 
within thy nest? Ought I then for a hollow log to forsake my 
proper place, and sing no longer near the bed where the lord 
and his beloved lie ? It is my duty, it is my law, ever to 
follow the highest things. But thou dost also boast of thy 



168 The Owl and the Nightingale [971- 

singing, that thou canst scream in fierce and mighty fashion: 
thou dost claim to direct mankind that they should bewail their 
transgressions. Yet were all men to make lament, crying out 
as if in torment, should they scream as thou art wont, they 
could but bring terror to their souls. A man must be calm, not 
given to wild words, even though he must bewail his sins,' 
But when Christ is praised, then shall he cry aloud, singing 
with ail his might. Hymn-singing in season can be neither 
too loud nor too long. Thou dost scream and lament, whereas 
I sing: thy note is tearful, mine gives delight. Ever may 
thou scream and weep to depart this life ! and may thou 
also scream so high as to burst both thine eyes! For which 
is the better of the two things, that a man be happy or 
else j)erturbed? So be it ever the lot of us two, that thou be 
sad and I be merry. But thou again dost ask why I go not 
hence, and sing my song in another land. No! what should 
I do amongst such people, to whom all happiness is unknown? 
That country is poor, it is not gracious, but mere wilderness, 
a barren land. Crags and rocks reaching up to heaven, snow 
and hail are common there. It is a horrible, an uncanny 
land: the inhabitants thereof are wild and wicked: they keep 
neither truce nor peace: nor do they care how they live. 
They eat raw fish, raw meat as well, tearing it to pieces like 
wolves. Milk they drink and also whey: they know not 
othenvise what to drink, having neither wine nor beer. 
They live, in truth, like wild bcjists: and they go clad in 
shag|Ty hides just as if they hailed from hell. If some good 
man to them came — as once upon a time one came from Rome, 
in order to teach them better manners and to leave their evil 
ways — he would do better to remain at home, for he would but 
waste his time. He could sooner teach a bear how to cany 
shield and spear, than he could bring a people so disorderly 
to listen to the song I sing. What should I do there with my 
singing? However long to them I sang, my song would be 
completely wasted : for neither halter nor bridle, instrument 
of steel nor of iron, can che^k them in their mad behaviour. 
But in a land which is pleasant and good, and where the 
people have gentle ways, there I turn my throat to account. 



-io9o] The Owl and the Nightingale 169 

for there I can render useful service: and glad tidings to 
them I bring, for I sing of the hymns of the Church. It was 
stated in the law of old time — and the wise saying still remains 
— that 'a man must plough and also sow where he expects to 
reap a harvest': for he is mad who sows his seed where no 
grass or blossom doth ever appear." 

The Owl was now angry, ready for strife : and after this 
speech she rolled her eyes. "Thou sayest that thou dost guard 
the dwellings of men where there are leaves and flowers that 
are fair: and where two lovers lie abed, well protected in 
each other's arms. Once didst thou sing — I know well whero 
— near to a dwelling. The lady thou wouldst tell of unlawful 
love: and, with song high and low, thou didst teach her to 
indulge a shameful and evil passion. Her lord, soon seeing 
how things were, set bird-lime and snares, and many other 
things in order to capture thee: and quickly didst thou come 
to the casement. Thou wert caught in a gin: thy shins paid 
thee out : and the doom decreed was none other than that 
thou shouldst be torn asunder by wild horses. Try, then, if 
thou canst agnin seduce either wife or maid : thy singing, 
forsooth, may prove so successful, that thou shalt flutter 
helplessly in a snare ! " 

The Nightingale, on hearing this, would have attacked with 
sword and spesr, had she but been a man: but since she could 
do nothing better, she took as her weapon her prudent tongue. 
"He fights well who talks well," so the song runs: and to her 
tongue she looked for help. " He fights well who talks well," 
as Alfred said. 

"What!" exclaimed the Nightingale, "sayest thou so, to 
put me to shame ? But the husband in the end had the worst 
of it. He was so jealous of his wife, that, to save his life, he 
could not bear to see a man speak with her, but his heart would 
break. He therefore locked her up in a certain dwelling — to 
her, a harsh and bitter treatment. And I had pity and com- 
passion on her: I felt sorry for her trouble, and amused her 
with my singing as much as I could, both early and long. And 
that was why the knight was wroth with me : he hated me 
out of sheer spite. He thrust on me his own disgrace, but it 



170 The Owl and the Nightingale [1090- 

all turned to his own injury. King Henry got to know of 
this — may Christ have mercy on his soul! Then did he 
outlaw the knight, who, through sheer spite and envy foul, 
had behaved so badly in that good king's land, as to 
have the little bird taken and condemned to death. That 
was an honour to all my kind: for the knight forthwith 
forfeited his happiness, and paid for me a hundred pounds. 
And, ever since, my birds have lived unharmed: they have 
lived in happiness and in joy, and have been of good cheer — 
as well they might. Thus was I so Avell avenged, that, ever 
since then, I speak more boldly; for since it happened so on 
one occasion, I am the blither ever more. And now I can sing 
wherever I will : nor durst any man annoy me. But as for 
thee, thou miserable thing! thou ghastly object! thou canst 
not find, thou knowest not of, a single hollow tree wherein to 
hide thee and so save thy skin. For girls and boys, masters and 
men all are keen on hurting thee. If they but see thee sitting 
quiet, they put stones in their pockets, and they pelt thee, 
and ill-treat thee, and break thine ugly bones to pieces. If 
thou art knocked over, or perchance, shot, then for the first 
time art thou useful. For then thou art hung upon a stick : 
and with thy grim and baggy body, and that hideous neck of 
thine, thou dost protect the cornfields from all animals. Alive 
and full-blooded, thou art useless : but as a scarecrow, thou 
art excellent. For where new seeds have been sown, there 
neither hedge-sparrow nor goldfinch, rook nor crow will ever 
venture, if thy carcase but hang near by. And where trees 
shall bloom in the spring-time, and young seeds burst forth 
and grow, there durst no bird venture to pluck them, if thou 
art hanging overhead. All thy life thou art sordid and vile: 
thou art useless except when dead. Now, indeed, canst thou 
know of a truth, that in life thine appearance is awesome: for 
even when thou art hanging dead, the birds that before cried 
out against thee, still remain in terror of thee. And rightly, too, 
are men hostile to thee : for thou dost sing ever of their 
troubles. All that thou singest, early or late, has to do with 
the misfortunes of men : and after thou haoi. cried out at night, 
men are mortally afraid of thee. Thou singest where someone 



-1206] The Owl and the NightiuQale 171 

is going to die: ever dost thou foretell some mischief or other. 
Thou singest before the loss of property, or of the ruin of a 
friend. Or else thou foretellest a house a-buming, an invasion 
of men, or the pursuit of a thief. Thou dost also predict a 
cattle-plague, that neighbours will suffer much distress, that 
a wife, again, shall lose her husband : or thou dost prophesy 
strife and disputes. Ever dost thou sing of the troubles of 
men: through thee they become both sad and miserable. Never 
at anytime dost thou sing except of some disaster or other. And 
this is the reason why thou art shunned, why thou art pelted 
and beaten with sticks and with stones, with turf and clods, so 
that no way of escape is left open for thee. Bad luck to such 
a herald amongst men, who is ever proclaiming futile secrets, 
bringing continually unwelcome tidings, and telling ever of 
unlucky things ! May the wrath of God Almighty and of all 
decent folk descend upon him ! " 

The Owl lost no time in making a rejoinder, stem and 
vigorous. " What !" she exclaimed, "art thou of priestly rank? 
or dost thou excommunicate, not being ordained ? For the 
priestly office thou art surely performing. I am not aware 
that thou wert ever a priest : I doubt if thou canst really sing 
mass, though thou knowest much of the Church's curse. It is 
because of thine ancient malice that thou hast cursed me this 
second time : and to this curse I can easily reply. 'Go to!' as the 
carter said. Why dost thou twit me with my foreknowledge, 
mine understanding and my power ? For most certainly I 
have much wisdom and am acquainted with all that the future 
holds. I have foreknowledge of famine and invasion : and I 
know if men are to have long life. I know, too, whether a 
wife shall lose her husband : also where malice and vengeance 
shall be rife. I can tell who is fated to be hanged or to come 
to some other vile end: and if men come together in battle, 
I am aware which side will be beaten. I know, also, if a pesti- 
lence is to fall on the cattle and whether the wild beasts shall 
lie still in death. I know if trees shall bear their blossom, if the 
cornfields also shall yield their increase. I am predict the burn- 
ing of houses : whether men shall run afoot or proudly ride. 
I know if ships will founder at sea, and if snow shall bind the 



172 The Owl and the Nightingale [120G- 

earth with Larsh fetters. And I know much more as well. I 
am well, skilled in bookish lore : I know more of Holy Writ 
than I will tell thee, for I go often to church and leam 
much wisdom. I know all the symbolical meanings, and many 
other things as well. If a man is to undergo the hue-and-cry, 
I know all about it before it happens. And so, because of my 
great knowledge, oft-times I sit, sad at heart and perturbed : 
for when I see trouble approaching to men, I cry aloud lustily, 
bidding them to be wary and to look to themselves. For 
Alfred said a wise thing which all men should treasure 
up: 'If thou seest [trouble] before it comes, it is robbed of 
wellnigh all its force.' And violent blows become the weaker, 
if one but cautiously takes heed of them; just as an arrow 
shall miscarry if thou seest it fly from the string. For then 
mayst thou well flinch and start aside, if thou seest it making 
for thee. If any man have fallen into disgrace, why shall he 
blame me for his trouble ? For although I see his trouble 
coming, it is not my fault that it comes. Or again, if thou 
shouldst see some blind man or other, who, unable to walk 
straight, pursues his erratic course to a ditch, and falling there- 
in, becomes covered with mud, dost thou suppose, although I 
see it all, that it happens any sooner because of me? And so 
it is with my foreknowledge : for when I am perched upon my 
bough, I know and discern very clearly, that on someone 
trouble is straightway coming. Shall he therefore, who knows 
nothing of it, put the blame on me because I know ? Shall 
he upbraid me for his misfortune, simply because I am wiser 
than he ? When I see that some trouble is coming, L call 
out lustily, bidding men earnestly to be on their guard, be- 
cause a cruel disaster approaches. But though I exclaim 
both loudly and quietly, it all comes about by the will of 
God. Why will men therefore complain of me, even though 
I annoy them with the truths I tell ? For though I warn 
them all the year round, the trouble is no nearer on that 
account. But to them I sing because I wish them to know, 
that when my hooting reaches their ears, some misfortune is 
hard at hand. For no man can be sure that he is exempt 
from the prospect and the fear of approaching trouble, even 



-1325] The Owl and the Nightingale 173 

though he cannot see it. Alfred therefore said very wisely, 
and his words were gospel truth, that 'every man, the better 
oif he is, the better he must look after himself.' And again: 
' Let no man trust too much to his wealth, though he be rich : 
for there is nothing so hot that it docs not grow cool, nothing 
so white that it does not soil, nothing so beloved that it does 
not become hateful, nothing so merry that it does not become 
angry. But every thing that is not eternal, and all worldly 
happiness, must pass away.' Now thou mayst clearly see that 
thy talk is foolish; for all that thou sayest to my shame, the 
same turns ever to thine undoing. However things go, in 
every bout, thou dost trip thyself up by thine own tricks. All 
that thou sayest to put me to shame, adds to mine honour 
in the end. Unless thou make a better beginning, thou shalt 
win naught but disgrace for thyself." 

The Nightingale, meanwhile, sat still and sighed: anxious 
was she — and with good reason — seeing in what way the 
Owl had spoken and managed her case. She was anxious 
and much puzzled as to what her reply should be: but 
nevertheless she bethought herself. "What!" she exclaimed, 
"Owl ! art thou mad? Thou art boasting of a strange wisdom, 
and thou wert ignorant from whence it came, unless by 
witchcraft it came to thee. And of witchcraft, thou wretch, 
thou must cleanse thyself, if thou art anxious to remain 
amongst men : otherwise must thou flee the country. For all 
those, who were skilled in witchcraft, were cursed of old by the 
mouth of the priest: as thou art still, since thou hast never 
forsaken witchcraft. I told thee this a short while ago: and 
thou didst ask in scornful tone, if I were ordained priest. 
But the cursing of thee is so common a thing, that were no 
priest to be found in the land, thou wouldst still be an outlaw. 
For every child calls thee vile, and every man, a despicable owl. 
I have heard — and true it is — that he who knows rightly 
what things are coming, as thou sayest is true of thee, must 
be well versed in star-lore. But what dost thou know of the 
stars, thou miserable object! except that thou beholdest them 
from afar? — as doth many a beast and man, who knows naught 
about such matters. An ape, for instance, may gaze on a book, 



174 The Owl and the Nightingale [1326- 

turn its leaves, and close it again : but it is unable, all the 
same, to make head or tail of what is written. And though 
in like fashion thou gaze at the stars, still art thou none the 
wiser for it. And yet, thou vile thing! thou dost chide and 
reproach me viciously for singing near to the dwellings of 
men and for teaching their Avivos to break their vows. Thou 
liest for certain, thou loathsome object! Wedlock through me 
was never impaired. Yet true it is that I sing and declaim, 
where ladies and fair maidens bo : and true is it also that of 
love ] sing. For a virtuous wife may, in her married state, 
love her own husband better far than any philanderer : and 
a maid may take a lover without loss of honour, with true 
affection loving him to whom she grants her favour. Such 
love as this I teach and commend : this is the burden of all 
my utterance. But if a wife be weak of will — for women are 
soft-hearted by nature— so that through the wiles of a fool, 
who doth eagerly entreat with many a sad sigh, she happen to 
go astray and do^wrong on occasion, shall I in that matter be 
held to blame? ^If women love foolish courses, am I to be 
scolded for their misdeeds?) Though a woman be bent on a 
secret love, I cannot nevertheless refrain from singing. A woman 
may frolic as she will — either honestly or viciously : and as a re- 
sult of my song, she may do as she will — either well or badly. 
For there is naught in the wide world so good that it may not 
do ev:il if turned to wrong uses. Gold and silver, for instance, 
are always valuable: yet with them may be bought adultery 
and other like crimes. Weapons, again, are useful in keeping 
the peace: yet men with them are unlawfully slain in lands 
where thieves make use of them. And so it is with ray 
singing: though it be chaste, it may yet be abused and 
connected with foolish and evil deeds. But must thou, wretched 
creature, speak evil of love? Of whatever kind it be, all love 
is pure between man and woman, unless it be stolen : for then 
it is impure and also corrupt. May the wrath of the Holy 
Kood descend upon those who thus transgress the laws of y 
nature! Strange is it that they go not mad. Yet, indeed, they 
do : for mad are they who go to brood without a nest. Woman 
is but frail of body : and since carnal lust is hard to crush, no 



-1449] The Old and the Nightingale 175 

wonder is it that it persists. But though fleshly lusts make 
women err, they are not all completely lost, who trip at the 
stumbling-block of the flesh. For many a woman, who has 
gone wrong, rises again out of the slough. Nor are all sins quite 
the same: they are, indeed, of two different kinds. One is the 
fruit of carnal lust: the other, of the spiritual nature. For 
whereas the flesh doth lead men to drunkenness, to sloth and 
also to wantonness, the spirit goes wrong through malice and 
anger, and through the joy felt at another's shame. It also 
gapes after more and more, recking but little of mercy 
and grace: and, ascending on high through haughtiness, it 
proudly disdains what is below. Tell me truly, if thou canst,, 
which is the worse, the flesh or thf^ sTu'rif,? Thou mayst 
answer, if thou wilt, that the flesh is the less evil: for 
many a man is pure of body, who in his heart is of devilish 
nature. No man must therefore cry out on a woman, upbraid- 
ing her for the lusts of the flesh: but such may he blame for 
wantonness as indulge in the greater sin of pride. Yet if 
through my singing I cause wife or maid to fall in love, I 
would defend the cause of the maid — if thou canst grasp my 
meaning aright. Listen now and I'll tell thee why — the reason 
complete from beginning to end. If a maid doth love privily, 
she stumbles and falls according to nature: for though she 
frolic for a time, she has not gone very far astray. From her 
sin she may esc-ape lawfully through the rites of the Church, 
and afterwards have her lover as husband, free from all ques- 
tioning: and to him she may go in the full light of day, whom 
before she had received under cover of darkness. A young maid 
knows nothing about such things: her young blood doth lead 
her astray, and some foolish fellow entices her to evil with all 
the tricks at his command. He comes and goes, he commands 
and entreats: he pays her attention, then neglects her, and thus 
does he woo her oft and persistently. How can the girl help 
but go WTong? She never knew what things were: and so she 
thought to make experiment, and learn for certain of the sport 
that tames high spiiits. And when I see the drawn expression 
which love gives to the young maid, I cannot refrain, out of 
sheer pity, from singing to her some song of cheer. Thus do 



176 The Owl and the Nightingale [1449- 

I teach them by my singing, that love of this kind doth not 
last long. For my song is but short-lived: and love merely 
alights upon such girls: it soon passes, and the liot passion 
quickly subsides. With them I sing for a while: I beo-in 
high and end low: and after a time, I cease completely. 
The maid doth know, when I have finished, that love is 
just like my singing: for it is but a brief excitement that soon 
comes and soon goes. The girl through me doth understand 
things; and her unwisdom is to wisdom turned. She sees 
clearly from my song, that unbridled love doth not last long. 
But this I would that thou shouldst know; hateful to me are 
the lapses of wives. And if a married woman will take heed 
of me, she will see that I do not sing in the breeding season. 
Though marriage bonds may seem to be harsh, yet a wife 
should ignore the teaching of fools. And to me it appears 
a most astounding thing, how a man could find it in his 
heart to wrong another's wife. For it means one of two al- 
ternatives; there can be no other possibility. Either, on the 
one hand, the husband is doughty; or else he is feeble and of 
no account. If he is honoured and courageous, no man, who 
is wise, will wish to shame him, especially through his wife: 
for he will stand in .awe of the good man's anger, and the 
payment of that penalty which shall deprive him of future 
longings. And even if that terror is not present with him, yet 
it is wicked and senseless in a high degree, to injure in this way 
a worthy man by alluring his partner away from him. If, on. 
the other hand, the husband is futile, and feeble as well, in all 
his relations, how could there exist any affection whatsoever, 
when such a boor makes love to her ? How can there be any sort 
of love, when he doth lie abed with her? From this thou art 
able clearly to see, that in one case there is sorrow, in the other, 
disgrace, as a result of stealing another man's wife. For if 
the man of courage be her husband, thou canst look out 
for trouble when lying by her side. And if the husband be 
good for nothing, what pleasure can be derived from the 
deed? If thou dost remember who is her bed-fellow, thou 
mayst with loathing pay for her favour. I know not how any 
man with self-respect may after that make advances to her. 



-1568] The Owl and the Nightingale 177 

If he but thinks by whom he lay, all his love will forthwith 
vanish." 

The Owl was glad to hear this charge: for she thought that 
the Nightingale, though arguing well to begin with, had in 
the end now come to grief. And so she exclaimed, "Now do I 
see that maidens are thy peculiar care: v/ith them thou dost 
side,defending them and praising them beyond all reason. The 
married women to me do turn: to me they make their com- 
plaints : for it happens, oft and frequently, that man and wife 
are at variance. Therefore that man is guilty of sin, who takes 
delight in loose living: who spends on a woman all that he has, 
making love to one without claim on him, and leaving at home 
his lawful wife, with bare walls and an empty house, leaving 
her, too, but thinly clad and poorly fed, without food and 
without clothing. And when he comes home to his wife again, 
she dare not utter a single word: he storms and shouts like 
a madman — and this is all the kindness he brings. All that she 
does merely annoys him : all that she says is utterly wrong. 
And often when she does nothing amiss, her reward is a blow 
from his fist in her teeth. There is no man living who cjinnot 
send wrong his wife by such treatment. Such a one may be 
so often maltreated, that on occasion she may consult her own 
pleasure. Lo! God knows ! she cannot help it even if she makes 
a cuckold of him. For it happens, time and again, that the wife 
is tender and gentle, fair of face and of good figure : and this 
but makes it the more unjust that he should shower his love 
on one who is not worth a hair of her head. And men of this 
sort are very plentiful, so that a wife is unable to behave 
properly. Nor may any man speak to her: for he thinks that she 
is about forthwith to betray him, if she but looks at a man or 
speaks him fair. And so he puts her under lock and key, as a 
result of which, marriage ties are oft-times broken. For if she 
is brought to such a pass, she does what before she h;ul not 
thought of. Accursed be he who talks too much, if such wives 
proceed to avenge themselves. Concerning this matter, wives 
to me make their complaint: and sadly enough do they grieve 
me. My heart, indeed, is wellnigh breaking when I behold 
their great distress. With them I weep bitter tears, and pray 
A. 12 



178 The Owl and the Nightingale [i568- 

that Christ shall have mercy on them, so that he may quickly 
succour the wife, and send to her a better husband. And, more- 
over, I can tell thee this, that to what I have said, thou shalt 
find no answer, even to save thy skin : for all thy talking shall 
now be futile. Full many a merchant and many a knight loves 
and cherishes his wife aright; as does many a husbandman 
too. And then the goodwife behaves accordingly, rendering 
him ser\'ice at bed and at board, with gentle deeds and 
kindly words, anxiously striving how to please him. The hus- 
band goes away amongst other people, bent on supplying the 
needvS of them both : and then is the goodwife sad at heart, 
because of her husband's anxious joumeyings. She sits a-sigh- 
ing, full of sad longings, and with sore vexation at her heart. 
Because of her husband she spends days that are troublous 
and watchful nights: and long to her the time doth appear, 
for every step seems a mile. While others around her lie 
w^rapt in sleep, I alone am listening outside the house : for 
well do I know her sad heart, and I sing at night for her benefit. 
And my song for her sake I turn partly into mourning. Thus 
of her sorrow I take a share, and that is why she welcomes me. 
I give to her what help I can, because she tries to do what Ls 
right. But thou hast sorely angered me, so that my heart is 
almost crushed, dnd with difficulty may I speak. And yet 
I will continue my charge. Thou saycst that I am hateful to 
men, that every man is angry with me, and, attacking me 
with stones and sticks, they beat me and break me all to pieces : 
and, moreover, when they have me slain, that they hang me 
high upon their hedges to scare away magpies and also crows, 
from the seeds that are sown near by. Though this be true, it 
is also true that I render them service; for them indeed did 
I shed my blood. I do them good by my death— which for thee 
is very difficu^, For although thou liest dead and shrivelling 
up, thy death nevertheless serves no purpose. I know not m 
the least what use thou art : for thou art only a miserable 
thing. But if the life is shot out of me, yet even so may I do 
some good. I can be fastened to a small stick in the thick-set 
of a wood, so that man can attract and capture little birds, 
and thus obtain through my help roast meat for his food. 



-1688] The Owl and the Nightingale 179 

But neither alive nor dead hast thou been useful to man. 
I know not why thou dost rear thy young: neither living nor 
dead are they any good." 

The Nightingale heard what had been said ; and hopping 
on to a twig in blossom, she perched herself higher than before. 
"Owl !" she said, "now take good heed. I will plead with thee 
no further, since here thy usual lore doth fail thee. Thou 
boastest that thou art hated by men, that every creature is 
angry with thee, and with yells and shouts thou dost bewail 
that thou art accursed. Thou saycst that boys catch thee and 
hang thee aloft upon a stick: that they also pluck thee and 
shake thee to pieces : while some of them make a scarecrow 
of thee. To me it seems that thou dost forfeit the game: for 
thou art boasting of thine own shame. Thou dost appear to be 
making a surrender, for thou boastest of thine own disgrace." 
When she had thus spoken, the Nightingale alighted in a 
lovely spot: and after having tuned her voice, she sang so 
shrilly and so clearly, that both far and near her notes were 
heard. And therefore presently to her came thrush and throstle 
and woodpecker, and other birds as well, both great and small. 
And since they assumed that she had beaten the Owl, they 
also cried aloud and sang many a tune. In just the same way 
does one cry shame on the gambler who plays at dice and 
loses the game. 

The Owl, on hearing this, forthwith exclaimed: "Hast thou 
indeed summoned an army? And dost thou, wretched crea- 
ture, wish to fight with me? Nay! nay! thou art not strong 
enough for that. What are they crjnng who have thus come 
hither? Methinks thou art bringing an army against me. But 
ye shall all learn, before ye fly hence, what is the strength of 
my particular tribe. For all with hooked bills and claws sharp 
and crooked, all belong to my own race, and would come if I 
but asked them. The cock himself, that valiant warrior, he 
must naturally side ^vith me ; for we both have voices clear, 
and both sit under the clouds at night. If I but raise the 
hue-and-cry against you, I shall bring up so mighty a host that 
your pride shall have a fall. I care not a straw for you all! 
Nor shall there be left by evening time one wretched feather 

12—2 



180 The Owl and the Nightingale [less- 

amongst you all. But it was agreed by us both when ^e came 
hither, that we should abide by that decision, which lawful 
judgment would give to us. Dost thou then wish to break 
this agreement? Judgment, I presume, seems too hard for 
thee: and since thou durst not await the verdict, thou dost 
wish, wretched creature, now to fight and quarrel ! Yet- I 
would give you all this piece of advice, before raising the 
hue-and-cry against you, that you should have done with 
your fighting, and fly away quickly and at once. For by these 
very talons of mine, if ye wait here for my ruthless horde, ye 
shall sing another tune and curse all fighting. For there is 
no one amongst you so brave as to endure the sight of my 
face." Thus with all boldness spake the Owl: for although 
she would not have gone so quickly after her host, yet she 
wished to reply in such terms as these. For many a man, 
feeble enough with spear and shield, yet causes his foe in the 
field to sweat out of sheer cowardice; so brave are his words, 
his countenance so dread. The Wren, however, because of her 
skill in singing, came in the morning to the help of the Night- 
ingale : for though her voice was but small, she had a throat that 
was good and shrill, and her songs were a source of pleasure 
to many. Moreover she was reckoned a bird most wise, for 
although she had not been bred in the woodland, she was 
brought up among the race of men, and from them she derived 
her wisdom. She could speak wherever she pleased — before 
the king if she wished. "Listen!" she said, "and let me speak! 
What! do you wish to break the peace, and to put the king to 
this disgrace? But he is neither dead nor infirm; and to both 
of you shall come trouble and shame, if in his land ye commit 
a breach of the peace. Therefore, have done and come to an 
agreement! Proceed at once to hear judgment; and let the 
verdict end this pica, as was arranged at an earlier stage." 

"I am quite willing," said the Nightingale, "but not. 
Mistress Wren, because of thine argument, but on account 
of ray o^vn law-abiding nature. I do not want lawlessness to 
win in the end: nor am I afraid of any judgment. I have 
promised — true it is — that Master Nicholas, with his wisdom, 
should be our judge: and I still hope that he will act. But 



-1794] The Owl and tlie Nightingale 181 

where should we be able to find him?" The Wren replied, as 
she sat in her lime-tree, "What! did ye not know of his 
abode ? He dwells at Portisham, a place in Dorset, in an outlet 
near the sea: and there be delivers many lawful judgments, 
he composes and writes many wise sayings, and indeed through 
his sayings and also his writings things are the better even 
in Scotland! To seek him out is an easy task, for he has 
but one dwelling — much to the shame of the bishops, and of 
all who have heard of him and his work. Why will they not 
arrange in their o^vn interests, that he should frequently be 
with them, teaching them out of his store of wisdom ? Why 
not give him livings in several places, so that he might often 
be at their service?" 

"Certainly," quoth the Owl, "that is quite true. These great 
men are much to blame, in passing over this excellent man — 
so well instructed in many things — and in bestowing livings 
indiscriminately, while him they hold in but light esteem. 
Towards their own kin they are more generous: they grant 
livings to little children. Thus their good sense shall convict 
them of error, in that Master Nicholas still suffers neglect. 
But let us however go now to him, for with him our judgment 
is ready." 

"Yes, let us do so," said the Nightingale, "but who is there 
to present our statement, and to speak before this judge of 
ours?" 

"On that point," replied the Owl, "I can set your mind 
at ease: for I can repeat every word from beginning to end: 
and if perchance I seem to go wrong, do thou protest and 
pull me up." And having thus spoken, they went on their 
way without any supporters, until they arrived at Portisham. 
But as to how they fared in the matter of judgment, I can 
tell you nothing: this is the end of this particular story. GAWAYNE AND
PREFACE


Arms and the man I sing,--not as of old
The Mantuan bard his mighty verse unrolled,
But in such humbler strains as may beseem
Light changes rung on a fantastic theme.
My tale is ancient, but the sense is new,--
Replete with monstrous fictions, yet half true;--
And, if you'll follow till the story's done,
I promise much instruction, and some fun.




CANTO I

THE GREEN KNIGHT





CANTO I

THE GREEN KNIGHT


King Arthur and his court were blithe and gay
In high-towered Camelot, on Christmas day,
For all the Table Round were back again,
At peace with God and with their fellow-men.
Their shields hung idly on the pictured wall;
Their blood-stained banners decked the festal hall
Light footsteps, rustling on the rush-strewn floors,
And laughter, rippling down long corridors,
Attested minds at ease and hearts at play,--
Rude Mars unharnessed for love's holiday.
In the great hall the Christmas feast was done.
The level sunbeams from the setting sun
Stretched through the mullioned casements to the wall,
And wove fantastic shadows over all.
The revelry was hushed. In tranquil ease
The warriors grouped themselves by twos and threes
About the dames and damsels of the court,
And chattered careless words of small import;
But in an alcove, unobserved, apart,
Young Gawayne sat with Lady Elfinhart,
In Arthur's court no goodlier knight than he
Wore shirt of mail, or Cupid's panoply;
And Elfinhart, to Gawayne's eager eyes.
Of all heaven's treasures seemed the goodliest prize.
Now daylight faded, and the twilight gloom
Deepened the stillness in the vaulted room,
Save where upon the hearth a fitful glow
Blushed from the embers as the fire burned low.
There is a certain subtle twilight mood,
When two hearts meet in a dim solitude,
That thrills the soul e'en to the finger-tips,
And brings the heart's dear secrets to the lips.
In Gawayne's corner, as the shades grew thicker,
Four eyes waxed brighter, and two pulses quicker;
Ten minutes more of quiet talk unbroken,
And heaven alone can tell what might be spoken!
But it was not to be, for fates unequal
Compelled--but this anticipates the sequel.
Just in the nick of time, King Arthur rose
From his sedate post-prandial repose,
And called for lights. Along the shadowy aisles
His pages' footsteps pattered o'er the tiles,
Speeding to do his errand, and at once
Four tapers flickered from each silver sconce.
The scene was changed, the dreamer's dream dispelled,
And what might else have been his fate withheld
From Gawayne's grasp. So may one touch of chance
Shatter the fragile fabric of romance,
And all the heart's desire,--the joy, the trouble,--
Flash to oblivion with the bursting bubble!

But Arthur, on his kingly dais-seat,
Felt nothing of the passion and the heat
That fire young blood. He raised his warlike head
And glancing moodily around him, said:
"So have ye feasted well, my knights, this day,
And filled your hearts with revel and with play.
But to my mind that day is basely spent
Which passes by without accomplishment
Of some bright deed of arms or chivalry.
We rust in indolence. As well not be,
As be the minions of an idle court
Where all is gallantry and girlish sport!
Some bold adventure let our thoughts devise,
To stir our courage and to cheer our eyes."
And lo! while yet he spoke, from far away
In the thick shroud of the departed day,
Upon the frosty air of evening borne,
Came the faint challenge of a fairy horn!

King Arthur started up in mild surprise,
While knights and dames looked round with questioning eyes,
And each to other spoke some hurried word,
As, "Did you hear it?"--"What was that I heard?"
But well they knew; for you must understand
That Camelot lay close to Fairyland,
And the wild blast of fairy horns, once known,
Is straightway recognized as soon as blown,
Being a sound unique, unearthly, shrill,--
Between a screech-owl and a whip-poor-will.
The mischief is, that no one e'er can tell
Whether such heralding bodes ill or well!

The ladies of the palace looked faint fear,
Dreading some perilous adventure near;
For peril can the bravest spirits move,
When threatening not ourselves, but those we love;
But Lady Elfinhart clapped hands in glee,--
In sooth, no sentimentalist seemed she,--
And cried: "Now, brave Sir Gawayne,--O what fun!
Succor us, save us, else we are undone;
Show us the prowess of your arm this night;
I never saw a tilt by candle-light!"
Gaily she spoke, and seemed all unconcerned;
And yet a curious watcher might have learned
From a slight quaver in her laughter free
To doubt the frankness of her flippancy.
Gawayne, bewildered, looked the other way,
And wondered what she meant; for in that day
The ready wit of man was under muzzle,
And woman's heart was still an unsolved puzzle;
And Gawayne, though in valor next to none,
Wished that _her_ heart had been a tenderer one.
His sword was out for any foe on earth,
And yet to face death for a lady's mirth
Seemed scarce worth while. What honor bade, he'ld do,
But would have liked to see a tear or two.

While thus he pondered, came a sudden burst
Of high-pitched fairy horn-calls, like the first,
But nearer, clearer, deadlier than before,
Blown seemingly from just outside the door.
The casements shook, the taper lights all trembled;
The bravest knight's dismay was ill-dissembled;
And as all sprang with one accord to win
Their swords and shields, stern combat to begin,
The great doors shot their bolts, and opened slowly in.

And now my laboring muse is hard beset,
For something followed such as never yet
Was writ or sung, by human voice or hand,
Save those that tell old tales from Fairyland.
"Miracles _do_ not happen:"--'t is plain sense,
If you italicize the present tense;
But in those days, as rare old Chaucer tells,
All Britain was fulfilled of miracles.
So, as I said, the great doors opened wide.
In rushed a blast of winter from outside,
And with it, galloping on the empty air,
A great green giant on a great green mare
Plunged like a tempest-cleaving thunderbolt,
And struck four-footed, with an earthquake's jolt,
Plump on the hearthstone. There the uncouth wight
Sat greenly laughing at the strange affright
That paled all cheeks and opened wide all eyes;
Till after the first shock of quick surprise
The people circled round him, still in awe,
And circling stared; and this is what they saw:
Cassock and hood and hose, of plushy sheen
Like close-cut grass upon a bowling-green,
Covered his stature, from his verdant toes
To the green brows that topped his emerald nose.
His beard was glossy, like unripened corn;
His eyes shot sparklets like the polar morn.
But like in hue unto that deep-sea green
Wherewith must shine those gems of ray serene
The dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear.
Green was his raiment, green his monstrous mare.
He rode unarmed, uncorsleted, unshielded,
Except that in his huge right hand he wielded
A frightful battle-axe, with blade as green
As coppery rust;--but the long edge shone keen.

Such was the stranger, and he turned his head
From one side to the other, and then said,
With gentle voice, most like a summer breeze
That rustles through the leaves of the green trees:
"So this is Arthur's court! My noble lord,
You said just now you felt a trifle bored,
And wished, instead of dancing, feasting, flirting,
Your gallant warriors might be exerting
Their puissance upon some worthier thing.
The wish, my lord, was worthy of a king!
It pleased me; here I am; and I intend
To serve your fancy as a faithful friend.
I bring adventure,--no hard, tedious quest,
But merely what I call a merry jest.
Let some good knight, the doughtiest of you all,
Swing this my battle-axe, and let it fall
On whatsoever part of me he will;
I will abide the blow, and hold me still;
But let him, just a twelvemonth from this day,
Come to me, if by any means he may,
And let me, if I live, pay back my best,
As he pays me. What think you of the jest?"
He said; and made a courteous bow,--the while
Lighting his features with a bright green smile;
As when June breezes, after rain-clouds pass,
Ripple in sunlight o'er the unmown grass.

The jest seemed fair indeed; but none the less
No knight showed any undue forwardness
To seize the offer. Some with laughter free
Daffed it aside; while others carelessly
Strolled to the farthest corners of the hall
As if they had not heard his words at all,
And whistled with an air of idle ease,
Or studied figures in the tapestries.
Not so Sir Gawayne. Vexed in mind he stood
With downcast eyes, and knew not what he would.
Trained in the school of chivalry to prize
His honor as the light of his dear eyes,
He held his life, his fortunes, everything,
In sacred trust for knighthood and his king,
And in the battle-field or tilting-yard
He met his foe full-fronted, and struck hard.
But now it seemed a foolish thing to throw
One's whole life to the fortune of a blow.
True valor breathes not in the braggart vaunt;
True honor takes no shame from idle taunt;
So let this wizard, if he wants to, scoff;
Why should our hero have his head cut off?

While thus Sir Gawayne, wrapped in thought intense,
Debated honor versus common sense,
The stranger knight was casting his green glance
Around the circling throng,--until by chance
He met the eyes of Lady Elfinhart,
And--did she flush?--and did the Green Knight start?
Surely a quiver twinkled in each eye;
But what of that? It need not signify:
Beneath his glance a brave man well might flush;
What wonder then that a fair maid should blush?
And as for him, no man that ever loved
Could look upon her loveliness unmoved.

Could I but picture her--ah, you would deem
My tale the figment of a poet's dream;
And if you saw her, (could such bliss be given),
You'ld think _yourself_ in dreamland--or in heaven.
Not the red rapture of new-wakened roses,
When morning dew their soul of love uncloses,
(Roses that must be wooed,--nor may be won
Save by the prince of lovers, the warm sun),
Not the fair lily, nor the violet shy,
Whose heart's love lurks deep in her still blue eye,
Nor any flower, the loveliest and the best,
Can image to you half the charm compressed
In those dear eyes, those lips,--nay, every part
That made that sum of witcheries--Elfinhart.

Her face was a dim dream of shadowy light,
Like misty moonbeams on the fields of night,
And in her voice sweet nature's sweetest tunes
Sang the glad song of twenty cloudless Junes.
Her raiment,--nay; go, reader, if you please,
To some sage Treatise on Antiquities,
Whence writers of historical romances
Cull old embroideries for their new-spun fancies;
I care not for the trivial, nor the fleeting.
Beneath her dress a woman's heart was beating
The rhythm of love's eternal eloquence,
And I confess to you, in confidence,
Though flowers have grown a thousand years above her,
Unseen, unknown, with all my soul I love her.

From these digressions upon love and glory,
'Tis time we were returning to our story.
I only meant, in a few words, to tell you
(For fear my heroine's conduct should repel you)
That if she jests, for instance, out of season,
Perhaps there is a good substantial reason.
Sir Gawayne, had he seen the stranger wink
And seen the lady blushing, you may think
Might have been spared a most unhappy lot.
Perhaps you're right;--but peradventure not.
I give you but a hint, for half the art
Of narrative is holding back a part,
And if without reserve I gave my best
In the first canto, who would read the rest?

But now Sir Gawayne, with a troubled eye,
Looked up, and saw his lady standing by.
Quoth he: "And if this conjurer unblest
Win no acceptance of his bitter jest,
How then in after days shall Arthur's court
Confront the calumny and foul report
Of idle tongues?" The wrath in Gawayne's eyes
Hashed for an instant; then in humbler wise
He spoke on: "Yet God grant I be not blind
Where honor lights the way; for to my mind
True honor bids us shun the devil's den,
To fight God's battles in the world of men.
Who takes this challenge up, I doubt will rue it."
Quoth Elfinhart: "I'ld like to see you do it!"
She laughed a gay laugh, but by hard constraint:
Then turned and hid her face, all pale and faint,
As one might be who stabs and turns the knife
In the warm heart of one more dear than life.
She turned and Gawayne saw not; but he heard,
And felt his heart-strings tighten at her word.
"Nay, lady, if you wish it I will try;
Be your least wish my will, although I die!
Yet one thing, if I may, I fain would ask,
Before I make the venture;--if this task
Prove fateful as it threatens,--do you care?"
"Perhaps," said Elfinhart, "you do not dare!"
Lightly she laughed, and scoffing tossed her head,
Yet spoke as one who knew not what she said,
With random words, and with quick-taken breath;
Then turned again, ere that same look of death
Should steal upon her and betray her heart
Despite all stratagems of woman's art.
And Gawayne heard but saw not; and the night
Descended on him, and his face grew white
With grief and passion. When all else is lost,
The brave man gives life too, nor counts the cost.
"I dreamt," he murmured to himself, "and dreaming
I took for truth what was but sweetest seeming.
My waking eyes find naught in life to keep;
I take the venture, and so back--to sleep."

By this, the stranger had at last become
Tired of long waiting, and of sitting dumb
Upon his charger; so with greenest leer
He vented his impatience in a sneer.
"Is this," he said, "the glorious Table Round,
And is its glory naught but empty sound?
Braggarts! I put your bluster to the test,
And find you quail before a merry jest!"
Then the great king himself stood up in ire,
With clenched hand raised, and eyes that gleamed dark fire,
And fronting the Green Knight he cried: "Forbear!
For by my sword Excalibur I swear,

"Whate'er thou be, thou shalt not carry hence
Unscathed the memory of thine insolence.
Such jests as thine please not; yet even so
I take thine axe; kneel thou, and take my blow."

Across the Green Knight's features there was seen
To pass a fleeting shade of deeper green,
Whether of disappointment or resentment
None knew; but straight a smile of bright contentment
Followed, as through the throng of dazed beholders
He saw Sir Gawayne thrust his sturdy shoulders.
The stranger winked at Elfinhart once more,
Well pleased, and Gawayne knelt down on the floor.
"A boon," he cried, "a boon, my lord and king!
If ever yet in any little thing
These hands have served thee, hear my last request:
Let _me_ adventure this mad monster's jest!"
King Arthur shook his head in dumb denial,
Loth to withdraw his own hand from the trial,
And leave the vengeance that himself had vowed;
But all the people called to him aloud,
"Sir Gawayne! let Sir Gawayne strike the blow!"
And Guinevere, the queen, besought him low
To leave this venture to the lesser man.
He yielded, and the merry jest began.

The visitor, dismounting, made a bow
To Arthur, then to all the court. "And now,"
Said he to Gawayne, "wheresoe'er you choose
To strike your blow, strike on; I'll not refuse;
Head, shoulders, chest, or waist, I little reck;
Where shall it be?" Quoth Gawayne, "In the neck!"

So Gawayne took the axe. The stranger knelt
Before him on the hearth and loosed his belt,
And threw back his green cassock and his hood,
To give his foe the fairest mark he could.
Then thus to Gawayne: "Ready! But remember
To come the twenty-fifth of next December,
And take from me the self-same stroke again!"
"And where," asked Gawayne, "may I find you then?"
"We'll speak of that, please, when you've struck your blow;
For if I can't speak, then you need not go!"
He chuckled softly to himself; then turned
And waited for the blow, all unconcerned.

Not so the knights and ladies of the court;
They pushed and craned their necks to see the sport;
Not from the lust of blood, for few expected
To see blood shed, or the Green Knight dissected,
But knowing that some marvel was in store
Unparalleled in all Arthurian lore,
And fairly filled with wide-eyed wonderment.
But Lady Elfinhart stayed not. She went
Into the alcove where we saw her first
And laid her sweet face in her arms, and burst
Into--but none could tell, unless by peeping,
Whether she shook with laughter or with weeping.

And Gawayne rubbed his arms, his chest he beat,
Then grasped the battle-axe and braced his feet,
And swung the ponderous weapon high in air,
And brought it down like lightning, fair and square
Upon the stranger's neck. The axe flashed through,
Cutting the Green Knight cleanly right in two,
And split the hard stone floor like kindling wood.
The head dropped off; out gushed the thick, hot blood
Like--I can't find the simile I want,
But let us say a flood of _crême de menthe_!
And then the warriors standing round about
Sent up from fifty throats a mighty shout,
As when o'er blood-sprent fields the long cheers roll
Cacophonous, for him who kicks a goal.

"O Gawayne! Well done, Gawayne!" they all cried;
But straight the tumult and the shouting died,
And deadly pallor overspread each face,
For the knight's body stood up in its place
And stepping nimbly forward seized the head
That lay still on the hearth-stone, seeming dead;
Then vaulted lightly, with a careless air,
Back to the saddle of his grass-green mare.
He held the head up, and behold! it spoke.
"My best congratulations on that stroke,
Sir Gawayne; it was delicately done!
Our merry little jest is well begun,
But look you fail me not this day next year!
At the Green Chapel by the Murmuring Mere
I will await you when the sun sinks low,
And pay you back full measure, blow for blow!"
He wheeled about, the doors flew wide once more,
The mare's hoofs struck green sparkles from the floor,
And with a whirring flash of emerald light
Both horse and rider vanished in the night.

Then all the lords and ladies rubbed their eyes
And slowly roused themselves from dumb surprise.
The great hall echoed once more with the clatter
Of laughing men's and frightened women's chatter;
But Gawayne, with the axe in hand, stood still,
Heedless of what was passing, with no will
For life or death, for all that made life dear
Was fled like summer when the leaves fall sere.
And Arthur spoke, misreading Gawayne's thought:
"Heaven send we have not all too dearly bought
Our evening's pastime, Gawayne. You have done
As fits a fearless knight, and nobly won
Our thanks in equal measure with our praise.
Be both remembered in the after days!"

So spoke the king, and, to confirm his word,
From far away in the deep night was heard
Once more the fairy horn-call, clear and shrill;
It died upon the wind, and all was still.
The hour was late. King Arthur, rising, said
Good-night to all his court, and went to bed.




CANTO II

ELFINHART





CANTO II

ELFINHART

In Canto I. I followed the old rule
We learned from Horace when we went to school,
And took a headlong plunge _in medias res_,
As Maro did, and blind Mæonides;
And now, still following the ancient mode,
I come to the time-honored "episode,"
Retrace my way some twenty years or more,
And tell you what I should have told before.
It seems an awkward method, but it's art;--
Besides, it brings us back to Elfinhart.

In those dark days before King Arthur came,
When Britain was laid waste with sword and flame,
When cut-throats lurked behind the blossoming thorn,
And young maids cursed the day when they were born,
A lady, widowed in one hideous night,
Fled over heath and hill, and in her flight
Came to the magic willow-woods that stand
Beside the Murmuring Mere, in Fairyland;
And there, untimely, by the forest-side,
Clasping her infant in her arms, she died.
Yet not all friendless,--for such mortal throes
Pass not unpitied, though no mortal knows;--
The spirits that infest the clearer air
Looked down upon the innocent lady there,
While troops of fairies smoothed her mossy bed
And with sweet balsam pillowed her fair head.
Her dim eyes could not see them, but she guessed
Whose gentle ministrations thus had blessed
Her travail; and when pitying fairies laid
Upon her heart the child,--a blue-eyed maid,--
Ere yet her troubled spirit might depart,
With one last word she named her "Elfinhart."

So with new-quickened love the fairy elves
Took the forlorn child-maiden to themselves
And reared her in the wildwood, where no jar
Of alien discord, echoing from afar,
Broke the sweet forest murmur, long years round.
Her ears, attuned to every woodland sound,
Translated to her soul the great world's voice,
And the world-spirit made her heart rejoice.
And love was hers,--perennial, intense,--
The love that wells from joy and innocence
And sanctifies the cloistered heart of youth,--
The love of love, of beauty, and of truth.

So Elfinhart grew up. Each passing year
Of forest life beside the Murmuring Mere
Enriched tenfold the natural dower of grace
That shone from the pure spirit in her face.
I cannot tell why each revolving season
Enhanced her beauty thus. Some say the reason
Was in the stars; _I_ think those luminaries
Had less to do with it than had the fairies!
The more they found of grace in her, the more
Their silent influence added to her store;
For they were always with her; they and she
Still bore each other loving company.

And yet one further virtue,--not the least
Of those that make life lovable,--increased
In Elfinhart's sweet nature from her birth
By fairy tutelage; and that was mirth.
For fairy natures are compounded all
Of whimsies and of freaks fantastical,
And what the best of fairies loves the best
(Except pure kindness) is an artless jest.
And so wise men have argued, on the whole,
That the misguided creatures have no soul;
But as for me, if the bright fairy elf
Has none, I'll get along without, myself!
These fairies laughed and danced and sang sweet songs,
And did all else that to their craft belongs,--
All tricks and pranks of whole-souled jollity
That make life merry 'neath the greenwood tree.
The youngest of them childishly beguiled
The time when Elfinhart was still a child;
They pinched her fingers, and they pulled her ears,
Or sometimes, when her blue eyes dreamed of tears,
Half smothered her with showers of four-leafed clover,--
Then fled for refuge to some sweet-fern cover;
But she pursued them through their tangled lair
And caught them, and put fire-flies in their hair;
And then they all joined hands, and round and round
They danced a morris on the moonlit ground.

The years went by, and Elfinhart outgrew
The madcap antics of the younger crew,
(For fairies age but slowly: don't forget
That at two hundred they are children yet!)
But still she frolicked with them, though scarce _of_ them,
And learned each year more tenderly to love them.
But most of all she loved with all her heart
On quiet summer nights to walk apart
And hold close converse with the fairies' queen,--
A radiant maiden princess who had seen
Some twenty centuries of revolving suns
Pass over Fairyland,--all golden ones!
Sometimes they sat still in the mild moon's light,
Where chestnut blooms made sweet the breath of night,
And talked of the great world beyond the wood,--
Of death, or sin, or sorrow, understood
Of neither,--till the twinkling stars were gone,
And bustling Chanticleer proclaimed the dawn.
And Elfinhart grew wise in fairy learning;
But by degrees a half unconscious yearning
For humankind stirred in her gentle heart,
And woke a deep desire to bear her part
Of love and sorrow in the larger life
As sister, helper,--nay, perhaps as wife;--
For such vague instincts, after all, are human,
And Elfinhart herself was but a woman.
And yet, for all this new desire, I doubt
If Elfinhart would e'er have spoken out,
And told the fairies of her wish to leave them,
(A wish her conscious heart well knew would grieve them),
If in the ripening of her silent thought
A still voice had not whispered that she ought
To leave that world of love and mirth and beauty,
To share man's burden in this world of duty.
(There's anticlimax for you! Most provoking,
Just when you thought that I was only joking,
Or idly fingering the poet's laurel,
To find my story threatens to be moral!
But as for morals, though in verse we scout them,
In life we somehow can't get on without them;
So if I don't insert a moral distich
Once in a while, I can't be realistic;--
And in this tale, I solemnly aver,
My one wish is to tell things as they were!
But not _all_ things; time flies, and art is long,
And I must hurry onward with my song.)
How Elfinhart at last told what she wanted,
And what the fairies said, please take for granted.
She prayed, they yielded; Elfinhart full loth
To leave, as they to let her go, but both
Agreeing that this bitter thing must be;
For they were fairies, and a mortal she.
But ere they yielded, they made imposition
Of what then seemed to her a light condition.
'Twas done in kindness, be it understood,
With fairy foresight for the maiden's good.
The elf-queen spoke for all: "Dear Elfinhart,
We bind you to one promise ere we part.
We fear naught from men's malice; hate and wrath
And every evil thing will shun your path,
And sunshine will go with you when you move;
The only danger that we dread is love.
If in the after days, when suitors woo you,
Your heart makes choice of one, as dearest to you,
Before you put your hand in his and own
The sacred trust reserved for him alone,
Let us make trial of him, and approve
His virtue, and his manhood, and his love.
Send him to us; and if he bears the test,
And if we find him worthy to be blest
With love like yours, be sure we will befriend him;
And may a life-long happiness attend him!
But if he prove a traitor, or faint-hearted,
Or if his love and he are lightly parted,
In the deep willow-woods he shall remain,
And never look upon your face again!"
The maiden, fancy-free, was well content,
And with light laughter gave her full consent;
For when maids think of love (as maidens do)
It seems a far-off thing; and well she knew
Her lover, if she loved, would be both brave and true!
Not long thereafter came an errant band
Riding along the edge of Fairyland,--
Stout men-at-arms, without reproach or spot,
And in the lead the bold Sir Launcelot.
He, riding on ahead, silent, alone,
Was stopped by a beseeching ancient crone
Who hobbled to his side, as if in pain,
And clutched with palsied fingers at his rein.
And there behind her, from the leafage green,
The sweetest eyes his eyes had ever seen
Were gazing at him with wide wonderment,
Nor bold nor fearful; innocence unshent
Shone from their blue depths, and old dreams awoke
In Launcelot's breast, while thus the beldame spoke:
"A boon, a boon, Sir Launcelot of the Lake!
I Pray you of your courtesy to take
This damsel to the King. Her enemies
Have spoiled her of her birthright, and she flees
An innocent outcast from her wasted lands,
To lay her life and fortune in his hands."
She spoke, and vanished in the woodland shade.

Then Launcelot, leaning over helped the maid
To mount behind and at an easy trot
They and the troop rode on to Camelot.
He asked no questions for some fairy spell
Made light his heart, and told him all was well;
And as these two rode through the land together,
By dappled greenwood shade and sunlit heather,
Her soft voice in his ears, the innocent charm
Of her light, steady touch upon his arm,
Wrought magic in his soul. That day, I ween,
Sir Launcelot well-nigh forgot his queen.
And Elfinhart (you knew those eyes were hers!)
Laughed with the silvery jingle of his spurs,
And from her heart the new world's rapture drove
All thought of Fairyland--excepting love.

And so to high-towered Camelot they came,
The golden city,--now a shadowy name;
For over heath-clad hills the wild-winds blow
Where Arthur's halls, a thousand years ago
Bright with all far-fetched gems of curious art,
Shone brighter with the eyes of Elfinhart.
She came to Camelot; the king receives her;
And there for five glad years my story leaves her.
Five glad years, and this "episode" is done,
And we are back again at Canto I.
I write of merry jest and greenwood shade,
But tales of chivalry are not my trade;
So if you wish to read that five years' story
Of lady-love, romance, and martial glory,--
The mighty feats of arms that Gawayne did,--
The ever ripening love that Gawayne hid
Five long years in his breast, biding his time,--
Go seek it in some abler poet's rime.
My tale begins with the young knight's brave soul
All Elfinhart's. She thinks herself heart-whole.

But at that Christmas feast, in Arthur's hall,
With night's soft mantle folded over all,
The magic influence of the evening tide
Stole on their two hearts beating side by side.
And Gawayne talked of troubles long ago,
When each man's neighbor was his dearest foe,
And of the trials he himself had passed,
And the high purpose that from first to last
Had been his stay and spur, he scarce knew how,
Since on Excalibur he took the vow.
He told of his own hopes for future days,
And how he wrought and fought not for men's praise,
(Though like all good men Gawayne held that dear),
Yet trusting, when men laid him on his bier,
They might remember, as they gathered round it,
"He left this good world better than he found it."
He talked as true men seldom talk, unless
Swayed utterly by some pure passion's stress,
And ever gently, though with heart on fire,
Still hovered nearer to his soul's desire.
And Elfinhart in gravest silence listened,
But her sweet heart beat high, her blue eyes glistened;
For as he bared his soul to her she dreamed
A day-dream strange and new, wherein it seemed
That in that soul's clear depth she saw her own,
And his most secret thought (till then unknown)
Seemed hers eternally. He spoke of death,
And then her heart shrank, and she drew deep breath.
Suddenly, ere she understood at all
What new life dawned before her, came the call
Of fairy horns; and so the Green Knight burst
Upon the scene, as told in Canto First.

One jarring note, the tuneful chords among,
May make mad discord of the sweetest song.
E'en so with dissonant clamor through the breast
Of Gawayne rang the Green Knight's merry jest;
But what wild meaning must it not impart
To the vague fears of gentle Elfinhart?
For she had heard in the first trumpet-blast
A signal to her from the far-gone past;
And now, of all the strange things that had been,
Her half forgotten compact with the queen
Flushed through her memory, and a swift thought came
Like sudden fear, a thought without a name,
An unvoiced question and a blind alarm;
And in sheer helplessness she reached an arm
Toward Gawayne scarcely knowing what she would;
Her eyes beheld him, and she understood.
And is it Gawayne? He? Yes, Elfinhart,
The hour has come, and you must play your part.

       *       *       *       *       *

So now it's all explained; and I intend
To go straight onward to the story's end.
Sir Gawayne had cut off the Green Knight's head,
And Arthur and his court had gone to bed;
In the great hall the dying embers shone
With a faint ghostly gleam, and there, alone,
While all the rest of Camelot was sleeping,
In the dark alcove Elfinhart lay weeping.
But as she lay there, all about her head
There fell a checkered beam of moonlight, shed
Through the barred casement; and she faintly stirred,
For in her troubled soul it seemed she heard
Vague music from some region far away!
She raised her head and, turning where she lay,
Saw in the silver moonlight the serene
And tranquil beauty of the fairy queen!

"We sent before you called us, Elfinhart,
For love lent keener magic to our art,
And warned us of the thoughts that in your breast
Awoke new rapture, trembling unconfessed."
And Elfinhart moved closer to her knees
And hid her face in the white draperies
That veiled the fairy form, till, nestling there,
Her heart recovered from that blank despair,
And whispered her that whatsoe'er befell
Love ruled the world, and all would yet be well.
And the good fairy stroked the maiden's head
And kissed her tear-starred eyes, and smiling said:
"Fie on you women's hearts! Consistency
Hides her shamed head where mortal women be!
True love breeds faith and trust, it makes hearts strong;
The heart's anointed king can do no wrong!
And yet you weep as if you feared to prove him;--
Upon my word, I don't believe you love him!"
And Elfinhart replied: "Laugh if you will,
My queen, but let me be a woman still.
You fairies love where love is wise and just;
We mortal women love because we must:
And if I feared to prove him, I confess
I fear I still must love him none the less."
She paused, for once again her eyes grew dim:
"Think you I love his virtues? I love him!
But yet you judged me wrongly, for believe me,
(And then laugh once again, and so forgive me),
If at the first I feared what you might do,
My doubts were not of Gawayne, but of you!"
And so both laughed, and for a little space
Folded each other in a glad embrace;
(For fairies, bathed the whole year round in bliss,
May yet be gladdened by a fair maid's kiss);
And Elfinhart spoke on: "Do what you will,
I trust you with my all, and fear no ill.
But oh, my friend, to wait the long, long year,--
To keep my heart in silence, not to hear
The words my whole soul hungers for, nor say
One syllable to brighten his dark day!
Must it be so, my queen? And how shall I
School eyes and lips to act this year-long lie?
From the dear teacher-guardian of my youth
The only ways I learned were ways of truth!
I tried my skill this night, and learned to know
That there are deeps below the deeps of woe;
Hearts may be bruised and broken, yet still live;--
The wounds that kill us are the wounds we give!"

And so these two talked on, until the night
Began to shiver with the gray dawn's light,
And in the deep-dyed casement they might see
New life flush through old dreams of chivalry.
And then they parted. What the queen had said
I know not, but the lady, comforted,
Bade farewell with calm voice and tranquil eyes,
And saw with new-born strength the new sun rise.
Perhaps in Fairyland there chanced to be
For them that grieve some sovereign alchemy
To turn the worst to best, and the good queen
Applied this soothing balm. Such things have been;
But yet I doubt if any fairy art
Was needed in the case of Elfinhart;
The medicine that charmed away her dole
Nature had planted in her own sweet soul.
Of all sure things, this thing I'm surest of,--
That the best cure for love's own ills is love.




CANTO III

GAWAYNE





CANTO III

GAWAYNE


O Muse!--But no: heaven knows I need a muse;
But which of all the nine, pray, should I choose?
Thalia, Clio, and Melpomene,
I love them all, but none, alas, loves me;
For if you want a muse to take your part
You must be solely hers with all your heart;
And I have mingled since my earliest youth
My smiles and tears, my fictions and my truth;
Nay, in this very tale, scarce yet half done,
I've courted all the nine, and so won none!
Not for me, therefore, the Parnassian lyre,
Or winged war-horse shod with heavenly fire;
Harsh numbers flow from throats whose thirst has been
A whole life long unslaked of Hippocrene;
But I will e'en go on as best I can
And let the story end as it began,--
A plain, straightforward man's unvarnished word,
Part sad, part sweet,--and part of it absurd.

A year passed by, as years are wont to do,
Winter and spring, summer and autumn too,
Till mid-December's flaw-blown flakes of snow
Warned Gawayne that the time was come to go
To the Green Chapel by the Murmuring Mere,
And take again the blow he gave last year.
In the great court his charger stamped the ground,
While knights and weeping ladies thronged around
To arm him (as the custom was of yore)
And bid him sad farewell for evermore.
One face alone in all that bustling throng
Our hero's eyes sought eagerly, and long
Sought vainly; for the lady Elfinhart,
Debating with herself, stood yet apart;
But as Sir Gawayne gathered up his reins
And bade the draw-bridge warden loose the chains,
Suddenly Elfinhart stood by his side,
Her fair face flushed with love, and joy, and pride.
She plucked a sprig of holly from her gown
And looked up, questioning; and he leaned down,
And so she placed it in his helm. No word
Might Gawayne's lips then utter, but he heard
The voice that was his music, and could feel
The touch of gentle fingers through the steel.
"Wear this, Sir Gawayne, for a loyal friend
Whose hopes and prayers go with you to the end."
And, staying not for answer, she withdrew,
And in the throng was lost to Gawayne's view.
He roused himself, and waving high his hand,
Struck spur, and so rode off toward Fairyland.

Long time he traveled by an unknown way,
Unhoused at night, companionless by day.
The cold sleet stung him through his shirt of mail,
But, underneath, his stout heart would not fail,
But beat full measure through the fiercest storm,
And kept his head clear and his brave soul warm.
No need to tell the perils that he passed;
He conquered all, and came unscathed at last
To where a high-embattled castle stood
Deep in the heart of a dense willow-wood.
And Gawayne called aloud, and to the gate
A smiling porter came, who opened straight,
And bade him enter in and take his rest;
And Gawayne entered, and the people pressed
About him with fair speeches; and he laid
His armor off, and gave it them, and prayed
That they would take his message to their lord,--
prayer for friendly shelter, bed and board.
He told them whence he was, his birth and name;
And the bold baron of the castle came,
A mighty man, huge-limbed, with flashing eyes,
And welcomed him with old-time courtesies;
For manners, in those days, were held of worth,
And gentle breeding went with gentle birth.
He heartily was glad his guest had come,
And made Sir Gawayne feel himself at home;
And as they walked in, side by side, each knew
The other for an honest man and true.

That night our hero and the baron ate
A sumptuous dinner in the hall of state,
And all the household, ranged along the board,
Made good cheer with Sir Gawayne and their lord,
And passed the brimming bowl right merrily
With friendly banter and quick repartee.
And Gawayne asked if they had chanced to hear
Of a Green Chapel by a Murmuring Mere,
And straightway all grew grave. Within his breast
Sir Gawayne felt a tremor of unrest,
But told his story with a gay outside,
And asked for some good man to be his guide
To find his foe. "I promise him," said he,
"No golden guerdon;--his reward shall be
The consciousness that unto him 't was given
To show a parting soul the way to heaven!"

Up jumped his host. "My friend, I like your attitude,
And know no surer way to win heaven's gratitude
Than sending thither just such men as you;
I'll be your guide. But since you are not due
At the Green Chapel till three nights from now,
And since the way is short, I'll tell you how
The interim may be disposed of best:--
In short, let me propose a merry jest!"
At this Sir Gawayne gave a sudden start,
For some old memory seemed to clutch his heart,
And in the baron's eyes he seemed to see
A twinkling gleam of green benignity
Not wholly strange; but like a flash 't was gone.
Gawayne sank back, and his good host went on:
"Two days you sojourn here, and while I take
My daily hunting in the wood, you make
My house and castle yours; and then, each night,
We'll meet together here at candle-light,
And all my winnings in the wood, and all
That comes to you at home, whate'er befall,
We'll give each other in exchange; in fine,
My fortune shall be yours, and yours be mine."
To Gawayne this seemed generous indeed.
And with most cordial laughter he agreed.
They clasped hands o'er the bargain with good zest,
And then all said good-night, and went to rest.

Next morning Gawayne was awakened early
From a deep slumber by the hurly-burly
Of footman, horseman, seneschal, and groom,
Bustling beneath the windows of his room.
He rose and looked out, just in time to see
The baron and a goodly company
Of huntsmen, armed with cross-bow, axe, and spear,
Ride through the castle gate and disappear.
And then, while Gawayne dressed, there came a knock
Upon his chamber door. He threw the lock,
And a boy page brought robes of ermine fur
And Tarsic silk,--black, white, and lavender,--
For his array, and with them a kind message,
Which the good knight received with no ill presage:
"Will brave Sir Gawayne spare an idle hour
For quiet converse in my lady's bower?"
The boy led on, and Gawayne followed him
Through crooked corridors and archways dim,
Along low galleries echoing from afar,
And down a winding stair; then "Here we are!"
The page cried cheerily, and paused before
The massive carvings of an antique door.
This he swung open; and the knight passed through
Into a garden, fresh with summer dew!
A lady's bower in Fairyland! What pen
Could make that strange enchantment live again?
Not he who drew Acrasia's Bower of Bliss
And Phædria's happy isle could picture this.
That sweet-souled Puritan discerned too well
The serpent's coil behind the witch's spell;
And he who saw--when the dark veil was torn--
The rose of Paradise without the thorn,
(Sublimest prophet, whose immortal verse
Lent mightier thunders to the primal curse),
Even he too sternly, in the soul's defense,
Repressed the still importunate cries of sense.
Bid me not, therefore, task my feebler pen
With dreams beyond the limits of their ken;
The phantom conjurings of the magic hour
That Gawayne passed in that enchanted bower
Must be from mortal eyes forever hid.
But yet some part of what he felt and did
These lines must needs disclose. As he stood there,
Breathing soft odors from the mellow air,
All hopes, all aims of noble knighthood seemed
Like the dim yesterdays of one who dreamed,
In starless caves of memory sunken deep,
And, like lost music, folded in strange sleep.

"How long, O mortal man, wilt thou give heed
To the world's phantom voices? The hours speed,
And fame and fortune yield to moth and rust,
And good and evil crumble into dust.
Even now the sands are running in the glass;
Set not your heart upon vain things that pass;
Ambitions, honors, toils, are but the snare
Where lurks for aye the blind old world's despair.
Nay, quiet the bootless striving in your breast
And let your tired heart here at last find rest.
In vain have joy, love, beauty, struck deep root
In your heart's heart, unless you pluck the fruit;
Then put away the cheating soul's pretense,
Heap high the press, fill full the cup of sense;
Shatter the idols of blind yesterday,
And let love, joy, and beauty reign alway!"

Such thoughts as these, confused and unexpressed,
Flooded the silence in Sir Gawayne's breast.
Meanwhile a brasier filled the scented air
With wreaths of magic mist, and he was ware
That the mist drew together like a shroud;
And then the veil was rent, and in the cloud
Stood one who seemed, in features, form, and dress,
The perfect image of all loveliness.

The wonders of that vision none could tell
Save one whose heart had felt the mystic spell.
Once and once only, in the golden days
When youth made melody for love's sweet lays,
In two dark eyes (yet oh, how bright, how bright!)
I saw the wakening rapture of love's light,
And, in the hush of that still dawning, heard
From two sweet trembling lips love's whispered word.
The twilight deepens when the sun has set;
In memory golden glories linger yet;
But these avail not. Though my soul lay bare,
With all those memories sanctuaried there,
That spell was human. But the unseen power
That wove the witchery of this fairy bower,
In Gawayne's heart such subtle magic wrought
That past and future were well-nigh forgot,
And all that earth holds else, or heaven above,
Seemed naught worth keeping, save this dream of love.

And now, as the strange cloud of incense broke,
The vision, if it were a vision, spoke,--
If it were speech that filled the quivering air
With low harmonious music. Let none dare
In the rude jargons of this world to fashion
That sweet, wild anthem of unearthly passion.
Could I from the broad-billowing ocean borrow
Of Tristan's love and of Isolde's sorrow,
The flood of those world-darkening surges, wrought
With thoughts that lie beyond the reach of thought,
Might bring me succor where weak words must fail.
But Gawayne saw and heard, and passion-pale
Shrank back, and made a darkness of his face;
(As though the unplumbed deeps of starless space
Could quench those lustrous eyes, or close his ears
To the eternal music of love's spheres!)
But the voice changed, and Gawayne, listening there,
Heard now a heart's low cry of wild despair.
He turned again, and lo! the vision knelt
And drew a jeweled poniard from her belt,
To arm herself against her own dear life;
But as she bared her white breast to the knife
He started quickly forward, and he grasped
The hand that held the hilt; and then she clasped
Her soft arms round his neck, and as their lips
Met in the shadowing fold of love's eclipse,
All earth, all heaven, all knightly hopes of grace,
Died in the darkness of one blind embrace.

Died? Nay; for Gawayne, ere the moment passed,
Broke from the arms that strove to bind him fast,
And turned away once more; and, as he pressed
A trembling hand against his throbbing breast,
His aimless fingers touched a treasured part
Of the green holly-branch of Elfinhart,
Laid in his breast when he put off his arms.
What perils now are left in fairy charms?
For poets fable when they call love blind;
Love's habitation is the purer mind,
Whence with his keen eyes he may penetrate
All mists and fogs that baser spells create.
Love? What is love? Not the wild feverish thrill,
When heart to heart the thronging pulses fill,
And lips that close in parching kisses find
No speech but those;--the best remains behind.
The tranquil spirit--the divine assurance
That this life's seemings have a high endurance--
Thoughts that allay this restless striving, calm
The passionate heart, and fill old wounds with balm;--
These are the choirs invisible that move
In white processionals up the aisles of love.

Such love was Gawayne's,--love that sanctifies
The heart's most secret altar; and his eyes
Were opened, and his pulses beat once more
Their old true rhythm. And so the strife was o'er,
And all the perilous wiles of magic art
Were foiled by Gawayne--and by Elfinhart.

But time flies, and 't were tedious to delay
My song for all the trials of that day.
Light summer breezes, skurrying o'er the deep,
Ripple and foam and flash,--then sink to sleep;
But underneath, serene and changing never,
The mighty heart of ocean beats forever,
And his deep streams renew from pole to pole
The living world's indomitable soul.
Enough, then, of the spells that vexed the brain
Of Gawayne; love and knighthood made all
vain.

And in the afternoon, when Gawayne learned
That his good host, the baron, had returned,
He met him in the hall at candle-light,
According to his promise of last night.
And then the baron motioned to a page,
And straightway six tall men, of lusty age
And mighty sinews, entered the great door,
Bearing the carcass of a huge wild boar,
In all its uncouth ugliness complete,
And dropped it quivering at our hero's feet.
"What do you say to that, Sir Gawayne?" cried
The baron, swelling with true sportsman's pride
"But come: your promise, now, of yester-eve;
'T is blesseder to give than to receive!
Though I'll be sworn you'll find it hard to pay
Full value for the winnings of this day."
"Not so," said Gawayne; "you will rest my debtor;
Your gift is good, but mine will be far better."
And then he strode with solemn steps along
The echoing hall, and through the listening throng,
And with the words, "My noble lord, take this!"
He gave the baron a resounding kiss.
The baron jumped up in ecstatic glee.
"Now by my great-great-grandsire's beard," quoth he,
"Better than all dead boars in Christendom
Is one sweet loving kiss!--Whence did it come?"
"Nay, there," Sir Gawayne said, "you step beyond
The terms we stipulated in our bond.
Take you my kiss in peace, as I your boar;
Be glad; give thanks;--and seek to know no more."
Loud laughter made the baron's eyes grow bright
And glitter with green sparkles of delight;
And then he chuckled: "Sir, I'm proud of you;
I drink your best of health; _I think you'll do!_"

And now the board was laid and dressed, and all
Sat down to dinner at the baron's call;
And Gawayne looked along the room askance,
Seeking the lady; and he caught one glance
Of laughing eyes--then looked away in haste,
But turned again, and wondered why his taste
Had erred so strangely, for the lady seemed
Not fairer now than others. Had he dreamed?
He rubbed his eyes and pondered,--though in sooth
Without one glimmering presage of the truth,--
Till all passed lightly from his puzzled mind,
Leaving contentment and good cheer behind.
So all the company feasted well, and sped
The flying hours, till it was time for bed.

One whole day longer must our hero rest
Within doors, to fulfill the merry jest.
So when, next morning, Gawayne once more heard
The hunt's-up in the court, he never stirred,
But let the merry horsemen ride away
While he slept soundly well into the day.
Later he rose, and strolled from room to room,
Through vaulted twilights of ancestral gloom,
Until, descending a long stair, he found
The dim-lit castle crypt, deep under ground,
Where sculptured effigies forever kept
Their long last marble silence as they slept,
And iron sentinels, on bended knees,
Held eyeless vigil in old panoplies.

Sir Gawayne, wandering on in aimless mood,
Pondered the tomb-stone legends, quaint and rude,
Wherein the pensive dreamer might divine
A tragic history in every line;
For so does fate, with bitterest irony,
Epitomize fame's immortality,
Perpetuating for all after days
Mute lamentations and unnoted praise.
And Gawayne, reading here and there the story
Of fame obscure and unremembered glory,
Found on a tablet these words: "Where he lies,
The gray wave breaks and the wild sea-mew flies:
If any be that loved him, seek not here,
But in the lone hills by the Murmuring Mere."
A nameless cenotaph!--perhaps of one
Like Gawayne's self deluded and undone
By the green stranger; and the legend brought
A tide of passion flooding Gawayne's thought;
A flood-tide, not of fear,--for Gawayne's breast
Shrank never at the perilous behest
Of noble knighthood,--but the love of life,
Compassion, and soul-sickness of the strife.
"If any be that loved him!" Oh, to die
Far from green-swarded Camelot, and lie
Among these bleak and barren hills alone,
His end unwept for and his grave unknown,--
Never again to see the glad sunrise
That brightened all his world in those dear eyes!

Half suffocating in the charneled air
Of that low vault, he staggered up the stair,
Out of the dim-lit halls of silent death
Into the living light, and drew quick breath
Where, through a casement-arch of ivied stone,
Bright from the clear blue sky the warm sun shone.
The whole of life's glad rapture thrilled his heart;
Till a quick step behind him made him start,
And there, deep-veiled, in muffling cloak and hood,
Once more the lady of the castle stood.

Low-voiced she spoke, as if with studied care
Weighing the syllables of her parting prayer.
"Sir Gawayne--nay, I pray you, turn not yet,
But hear me;--though my heart may not forget
That once, for one sweet moment, you were kind,
I come not to recall that to your mind;--
Between us two be love's words aye unspoken!
Yet ere you go, I pray you, leave some token
That in the long, long years may comfort me
For the dear face I nevermore shall see."
"Nay, lady," said the knight, "I have no gifts
To give you. Errant knighthood ever drifts
From shore to shore, by wandering breezes blown,
With naught save its good name to call its own.
In friendship, then, I pray you keep for me
My name untarnished in your memory."
"Ah, sir," she said, "my memory bears that name
Burnt in with characters of living flame.
But though you give me naught, I pray you take
This girdle from me;--wear it for my sake;
Nay, but refuse me not; you little know
Its magic power. I had it long ago
From Fairyland; and its encircling charm
Keeps scathless him who wears it from all harm;
No evil thing can touch him. Gird it on,
If but to ease my heart when you are gone."

She held a plain green girdle in her hand,
In outward seeming just a narrow band
Of silk, with silver clasps; but in those days
The strangest things were wrought in simplest ways,
As Gawayne knew full well; and he could see
That all the lady said was verity.
He took the girdle, held it, fingered it,
Then clasped it round his waist to try the fit,
Irresolutely dallying with temptation,
Till conscience grew too weak for inclination;
For at the last he threw one wandering glance
Out at the casement, and the merry dance
Of sparkling sunbeams on the fields of snow
Wrought havoc in his wavering heart; and so,
Repeating to himself one word: "Life, life!"
He took the token from the baron's wife.

That evening, when the baron and our knight
Met to exchange their gifts at candle-light,
The baron, looking graver than before,
Said: "Sir, my luck has left me; not a boar
Did we get wind of, all this blessed day.
I come with empty hands, only to pray
Your pardon. What good fortune do _you_ bring?"
And Gawayne answered firmly: "Not a thing!"




CANTO IV

CONCLUSION





CANTO IV

CONCLUSION


By noon the next day, Gawayne and his host
Rode side by side along the perilous coast
Of the gray Mere, from whose unquiet sleep
Reverberating murmurs of the deep
Startled the still December's listening air.
The baron, shuddering, pointed seaward. "There,"
He said, "year in, year out, these voices haunt
That fearful water; heaven knows what they want!
Men tell me--and I have no doubt it's true--
They are knights-errant whom the Green Knight slew!
Woe unto him, the over-bold, who dares
Adventure near that uncouth monster's snares!"
Quoth Gawayne: "How have _you_ escaped the net?"
The baron answered: "I? We never met!
When I'm about, he seems to shun the place,
And where he is, I never show my face;
But if we did meet, 't would be safe to say
Not more than one of us would get away!"

And then the baron told tales by the score
About the Green Knight's quenchless thirst for gore,
And kept repeating that no magic charm
Was proof against the prowess of his arm;
At his first blow each vain defense must fall,
For he was arch-magician over all.
And as from tale to tale the baron ran,
Sir Gawayne, had he been another man,
Would certainly have felt his heart's blood curdle,
Despite his secret wearing of the girdle;
But when the baron finally suggested
Abandoning the venture, and protested
That the whole monstrous business was absurd,
Sir Gawayne simply said: "I gave my word."
And when the baron saw he would not bend,
He seemed to lose all patience. "Well, my friend,
I'll go no further with you. On your head
Shall be your own mad blood when you are dead.
Yonder your two roads fork; pause there, I pray,
And ponder well before you choose your way.
One takes the hills, one winds along the wave;
To Camelot this,--the other to your grave!
Choose the high road, Sir Gawayne; shun the danger!
Say you were misdirected by a stranger;--
I swear by all that's sacred, I'll not tell
One syllable to a soul:--and so farewell!"
He galloped off without another word,
And vanished where the road turned. Gawayne heard,
Long after he had disappeared, the sound
Of iron hoof-beats on the frozen ground,
Till all died into silence, save those drear
And hollow voices from the Murmuring Mere.

But Gawayne chose the lower road, and passed
Along the desolate shore. The die was cast.
The western skies, as the red sun sank low,
Cast purple shades across the drifted snow,
And Gawayne knew that the dread hour was come
For the fulfillment of his martyrdom.

And now, from just beyond a jutting hill,
Came hideous sounds, as of a giant mill
That hisses, roars, and sputters, clicks and clacks;--
It was the Green Knight sharpening his axe!
And Gawayne, coming past the corner, found him,
With ghastly mouldering skulls and bones strewn round him,
In joyous fury urging the keen steel
Against the surface of his grinding wheel.
The place was a wild hollow, circled round
With barren hills, and on the bottom ground
Stood the Green Chapel, moss-grown, solitary;--
In sooth, it seemed the devil's mortuary!
The Green Knight's back was turned, and he stirred not
Till Gawayne hailed him sharply; then he shot
One glance--as when, o'erhead, a living wire
Startles the night with flashes of green fire;--
Then hurried forward, bland as bland could be,
And greeted Gawayne with green courtesy.
"Dear sir, I ask a thousand pardons; pray
Forgive me. You are punctual to the day;
That's good! Of course I knew you would not fail.
How do you do? You look a trifle pale;
I trust, with all my heart, you are not ill?
Just the cold air? It does blow rather chill!
What can I do to cheer you? Let me see;--
Suppose I brew a cup of hot green tea?
You'ld rather not? You're pressed for time? Of course,
I understand; then just get off your horse,
And I'll do all I can to expedite
Our little business for you. There, that's right;
And now your helmet? Thanks; and if you please
Perhaps you'll kindly kneel down on your knees,
As I did when I came to Camelot; So!
Are you all ready? Will you bide the blow?"
And Gawayne said "I will," in such soft notes
As happy bridegrooms utter, when their throats
Are paralyzed with blest anticipation;--
(What Gawayne looked for was decapitation!)
And then the Green Knight swung his axe in air
With a loud whirr; and Gawayne, kneeling there,
Shrank back an inch; and the green giant stayed
His threatening hand, and with a cold sneer said:
"You shrink, sir, from the axe; I can't hit true
Unless you hold still, as I did for you."
"Your pardon," Gawayne said, with bated breath;
"This time I swear to hold as still as death."
He did so, and the Green Knight swung again
His axe, and whirled it round his head, and then,
Pausing a second time, said: "Very good!
You're holding quite still now; I knew you would!"
Gawayne, in anger, said: "Jest, if you like,
After the blow; tarry no longer; strike!"
So once again the ponderous axe was raised;
But this time down it came, and lightly grazed
Sir Gawayne's neck. He felt the hot blood flow,
And saw red drops that sank deep in the snow,
And then he jumped up, faced his foe, and cried:
"Enough: you owed me one blow, though I died;
But be you man or beast or devil abhorred,
I yield no further; with my mortal sword
I do defy you; and if mortal man
May hope against" ...
                   But the Green Knight began
A low melodious laugh, like running brooks
Whose pebbly babble fills the shadowy nooks
Of green-aisled woodlands, when the winds are still.
"My friend, we bear each other no ill will.
When first I swung my axe, you showed some fear;
I owed you that much for your blow last year.
The second time I swung,--yet spared your life,--
That paid you for the kiss you gave my wife!"
"Your wife!" "My wife, Sir Gawayne; 't was my word;
And when I swung my weapon for the third
And last time, then I made the red blood spirt
For that green girdle underneath your shirt!
You played me false, my friend!"
                                   And Gawayne knelt
Once more, and casting off the magic belt,
In bitter broken words confessed his shame,
And begged the Green Knight to avenge the name
Of injured knighthood, and with one last blow
To end his guilty life. "Nay, nay, not so,"
The other softly said. "Be of good cheer;
Your fault was small, for all men hold life dear.
We tempted you, my friend, with all our might,
And proved you in good sooth a noble knight;
A veritable Joseph, sir, you are!"
Quoth Gawayne drily, "Thanks, Lord Potiphar!
But may I ask you why you played this part?"
The other said: "Ask Lady Elfinhart!"

He smiled, and from his smile a genial glow
Of green mid-summer seemed to overflow,
Filling with verdure all that barren place.
The warm red blood rushed to Sir Gawayne's face;
He caught his breath, and in his eager eyes
There shone a sudden flash of dark surmise,
And then he stood a long while pondering;
But in his breast his heart began to sing
The old, old music whose still echoes roll
Forever voiceless through the listening soul.
He said farewell to his good fairy friend
As in a dream, where real and unreal blend
In phantom unison, and with the light
Of love to lead him home, rode through the night,
Beside the tranquil murmurs of the Mere,
And through the silence of the passing year;
And earth and sea and starlit sky took part
In the still exaltation of his heart,
While all but love and wonder was forgot,
Until he came to high-towered Camelot.

To Camelot he came, and there he found
The good King Arthur and his Table Round
Awaiting his return in anxious doubt;
But ere he passed the gates a mighty shout
Rose from the watchmen on the outward wall
And bore the tidings to the inmost hall.
From every window flaunting flags were flung;
From the high battlements brass trumpets sung;
And great bells, chiming in the topmost tower,
Pealed salutation to the joyous hour,
As Gawayne, riding through the cullis-port,
Faced the glad throng that filled the palace court.

And with this tribute paid to knightly glory
It seems most fitting to conclude my story.
Entreat me not, dear reader, to impart
Further of Gawayne, or of Elfinhart.
Let your own fancy round the story out
Whatever way you please; I cannot doubt
The sequel; but when I, in silent thought,
Had brought Sir Gawayne back to her, and sought
With hand profane to lift the veil, behind
Whose secret shelter their two hearts enshrined
The mutual covenant of love's mystery,
That pure fane would not desecrated be.
But this alone I know: the power that wove
Through human lives the warp and woof of love
Wrought not in darkness, nor with hand unsure;--
His fabric must forevermore endure.
And hence I doubt not that these two were blest
As none may be, save they who have confessed
Allegiance to that mighty spirit's law,
And trod his holy ground with reverent awe.
I

From fairest creatures we desire increase,
That thereby beauty’s rose might never die,
But as the riper should by time decease,
His tender heir might bear his memory:
But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Feed’st thy light’s flame with self-substantial fuel,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
Thou that art now the world’s fresh ornament,
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
And tender churl mak’st waste in niggarding:
    Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
    To eat the world’s due, by the grave and thee.

II

When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty’s field,
Thy youth’s proud livery so gazed on now,
Will be a tatter’d weed of small worth held:
Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
How much more praise deserv’d thy beauty’s use,
If thou couldst answer ‘This fair child of mine
Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,’
Proving his beauty by succession thine!
    This were to be new made when thou art old,
    And see thy blood warm when thou feel’st it cold.

III

Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
Now is the time that face should form another;
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
For where is she so fair whose unear’d womb
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
Of his self-love to stop posterity?
Thou art thy mother’s glass and she in thee
Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
    But if thou live, remember’d not to be,
    Die single and thine image dies with thee.

IV

Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
Upon thyself thy beauty’s legacy?
Nature’s bequest gives nothing, but doth lend,
And being frank she lends to those are free:
Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
For having traffic with thyself alone,
Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive:
Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
    Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
    Which, used, lives th’ executor to be.

V

Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
Will play the tyrants to the very same
And that unfair which fairly doth excel;
For never-resting time leads summer on
To hideous winter, and confounds him there;
Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone,
Beauty o’er-snowed and bareness every where:
Then were not summer’s distillation left,
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
Beauty’s effect with beauty were bereft,
Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was:
    But flowers distill’d, though they with winter meet,
    Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.


VI

Then let not winter’s ragged hand deface,
In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill’d:
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
With beauty’s treasure ere it be self-kill’d.
That use is not forbidden usury,
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
That’s for thyself to breed another thee,
Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
Ten times thyself were happier than thou art,
If ten of thine ten times refigur’d thee:
Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
Leaving thee living in posterity?
    Be not self-will’d, for thou art much too fair
    To be death’s conquest and make worms thine heir.

VII

Lo! in the orient when the gracious light
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
And having climb’d the steep-up heavenly hill,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
The eyes, ’fore duteous, now converted are
From his low tract, and look another way:
    So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon:
    Unlook’d, on diest unless thou get a son.

VIII

Music to hear, why hear’st thou music sadly?
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
Why lov’st thou that which thou receiv’st not gladly,
Or else receiv’st with pleasure thine annoy?
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
    Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
    Sings this to thee: ‘Thou single wilt prove none.’

IX

Is it for fear to wet a widow’s eye,
That thou consum’st thyself in single life?
Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
The world will be thy widow and still weep
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
When every private widow well may keep
By children’s eyes, her husband’s shape in mind:
Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
But beauty’s waste hath in the world an end,
And kept unused the user so destroys it.
    No love toward others in that bosom sits
    That on himself such murd’rous shame commits.

X

For shame! deny that thou bear’st love to any,
Who for thyself art so unprovident.
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov’d of many,
But that thou none lov’st is most evident:
For thou art so possess’d with murderous hate,
That ’gainst thyself thou stick’st not to conspire,
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind:
Shall hate be fairer lodg’d than gentle love?
Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
    Make thee another self for love of me,
    That beauty still may live in thine or thee.

XI

As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow’st,
In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow’st,
Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest,
Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
Without this folly, age, and cold decay:
If all were minded so, the times should cease
And threescore year would make the world away.
Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
Look, whom she best endow’d, she gave thee more;
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
    She carv’d thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
    Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.

XII

When I do count the clock that tells the time,
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
When I behold the violet past prime,
And sable curls, all silvered o’er with white;
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
And summer’s green all girded up in sheaves,
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
Then of thy beauty do I question make,
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
And die as fast as they see others grow;
    And nothing ’gainst Time’s scythe can make defence
    Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.

XIII

O! that you were your self; but, love you are
No longer yours, than you yourself here live:
Against this coming end you should prepare,
And your sweet semblance to some other give:
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
Find no determination; then you were
Yourself again, after yourself’s decease,
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
Against the stormy gusts of winter’s day
And barren rage of death’s eternal cold?
    O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know,
    You had a father: let your son say so.

XIV

Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck;
And yet methinks I have astronomy,
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons’ quality;
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
Or say with princes if it shall go well
By oft predict that I in heaven find:
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
And constant stars in them I read such art
As ‘Truth and beauty shall together thrive,
If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert’;
    Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
    ‘Thy end is truth’s and beauty’s doom and date.’

XV

When I consider everything that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky,
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
And wear their brave state out of memory;
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay
To change your day of youth to sullied night,
    And all in war with Time for love of you,
    As he takes from you, I engraft you new.

XVI

But wherefore do not you a mightier way
Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
And fortify yourself in your decay
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
So should the lines of life that life repair,
Which this, Time’s pencil, or my pupil pen,
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
Can make you live yourself in eyes of men.
    To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
    And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.

XVII

Who will believe my verse in time to come,
If it were fill’d with your most high deserts?
Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts.
If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
The age to come would say ‘This poet lies;
Such heavenly touches ne’er touch’d earthly faces.’
So should my papers, yellow’d with their age,
Be scorn’d, like old men of less truth than tongue,
And your true rights be term’d a poet’s rage
And stretched metre of an antique song:
    But were some child of yours alive that time,
    You should live twice,—in it, and in my rhyme.

XVIII

Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer’s lease hath all too short a date:
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimm’d,
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance, or nature’s changing course untrimm’d:
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow’st,
Nor shall death brag thou wander’st in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou grow’st,
    So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
    So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.

XIX

Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion’s paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger’s jaws,
And burn the long-liv’d phoenix, in her blood;
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
And do whate’er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
O! carve not with thy hours my love’s fair brow,
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
Him in thy course untainted do allow
For beauty’s pattern to succeeding men.
    Yet do thy worst, old Time; despite thy wrong,
    My love shall in my verse ever live young.

XX

A woman’s face with nature’s own hand painted,
Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
A woman’s gentle heart, but not acquainted
With shifting change, as is false women’s fashion:
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
A man in hue all ‘hues’ in his controlling,
Which steals men’s eyes and women’s souls amazeth.
And for a woman wert thou first created;
Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
And by addition me of thee defeated,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
    But since she prick’d thee out for women’s pleasure,
    Mine be thy love and thy love’s use their treasure.

XXI

So is it not with me as with that Muse,
Stirr’d by a painted beauty to his verse,
Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
Making a couplement of proud compare.
With sun and moon, with earth and sea’s rich gems,
With April’s first-born flowers, and all things rare,
That heaven’s air in this huge rondure hems.
O! let me, true in love, but truly write,
And then believe me, my love is as fair
As any mother’s child, though not so bright
As those gold candles fix’d in heaven’s air:
    Let them say more that like of hearsay well;
    I will not praise that purpose not to sell.

XXII

My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
So long as youth and thou are of one date;
But when in thee time’s furrows I behold,
Then look I death my days should expiate.
For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
How can I then be elder than thou art?
O! therefore love, be of thyself so wary
As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
    Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
    Thou gav’st me thine not to give back again.

XXIII

As an unperfect actor on the stage,
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
Whose strength’s abundance weakens his own heart;
So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
The perfect ceremony of love’s rite,
And in mine own love’s strength seem to decay,
O’ercharg’d with burthen of mine own love’s might.
O! let my looks be then the eloquence
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
More than that tongue that more hath more express’d.
    O! learn to read what silent love hath writ:
    To hear with eyes belongs to love’s fine wit.

XXIV

Mine eye hath play’d the painter and hath stell’d,
Thy beauty’s form in table of my heart;
My body is the frame wherein ’tis held,
And perspective it is best painter’s art.
For through the painter must you see his skill,
To find where your true image pictur’d lies,
Which in my bosom’s shop is hanging still,
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
    Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
    They draw but what they see, know not the heart.

XXV

Let those who are in favour with their stars
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars
Unlook’d for joy in that I honour most.
Great princes’ favourites their fair leaves spread
But as the marigold at the sun’s eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
After a thousand victories once foil’d,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
And all the rest forgot for which he toil’d:
    Then happy I, that love and am belov’d,
    Where I may not remove nor be remov’d.

XXVI

Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
To thee I send this written embassage,
To witness duty, not to show my wit:
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
In thy soul’s thought, all naked, will bestow it:
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
And puts apparel on my tatter’d loving,
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect:
    Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
    Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.

XXVII

Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
The dear respose for limbs with travel tir’d;
But then begins a journey in my head
To work my mind, when body’s work’s expired:
For then my thoughts, from far where I abide,
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see:
Save that my soul’s imaginary sight
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night,
Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
    Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
    For thee, and for myself, no quiet find.

XXVIII

How can I then return in happy plight,
That am debarre’d the benefit of rest?
When day’s oppression is not eas’d by night,
But day by night and night by day oppress’d,
And each, though enemies to either’s reign,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
The one by toil, the other to complain
How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
I tell the day, to please him thou art bright,
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
So flatter I the swart-complexion’d night,
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild’st the even.
    But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
    And night doth nightly make grief’s length seem stronger.

XXIX

When in disgrace with fortune and men’s eyes
I all alone beweep my outcast state,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
And look upon myself, and curse my fate,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Featur’d like him, like him with friends possess’d,
Desiring this man’s art, and that man’s scope,
With what I most enjoy contented least;
Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
Like to the lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven’s gate;
    For thy sweet love remember’d such wealth brings
    That then I scorn to change my state with kings.

XXX

When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear time’s waste:
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
For precious friends hid in death’s dateless night,
And weep afresh love’s long since cancell’d woe,
And moan the expense of many a vanish’d sight:
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o’er
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
    But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
    All losses are restor’d and sorrows end.

XXXI

Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
Which I by lacking have supposed dead;
And there reigns Love, and all Love’s loving parts,
And all those friends which I thought buried.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stol’n from mine eye,
As interest of the dead, which now appear
But things remov’d that hidden in thee lie!
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
That due of many now is thine alone:
    Their images I lov’d, I view in thee,
    And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.

XXXII

If thou survive my well-contented day,
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
Compare them with the bett’ring of the time,
And though they be outstripp’d by every pen,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
O! then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
‘Had my friend’s Muse grown with this growing age,
A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
To march in ranks of better equipage:
    But since he died and poets better prove,
    Theirs for their style I’ll read, his for his love’.

XXXIII

Full many a glorious morning have I seen
Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
With all triumphant splendour on my brow;
But out! alack! he was but one hour mine,
The region cloud hath mask’d him from me now.
    Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
    Suns of the world may stain when heaven’s sun staineth.

XXXIV

Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
To let base clouds o’ertake me in my way,
Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
’Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
For no man well of such a salve can speak,
That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
The offender’s sorrow lends but weak relief
To him that bears the strong offence’s cross.
    Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
    And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.

XXXV

No more be griev’d at that which thou hast done:
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud:
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
All men make faults, and even I in this,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense;
Thy adverse party is thy advocate,
And ’gainst myself a lawful plea commence:
Such civil war is in my love and hate,
    That I an accessary needs must be,
    To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.

XXXVI

Let me confess that we two must be twain,
Although our undivided loves are one:
So shall those blots that do with me remain,
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
In our two loves there is but one respect,
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Which though it alter not love’s sole effect,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love’s delight.
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
    But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
    As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

XXXVII

As a decrepit father takes delight
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
So I, made lame by Fortune’s dearest spite,
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth;
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more,
Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit,
I make my love engrafted, to this store:
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despis’d,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
That I in thy abundance am suffic’d,
And by a part of all thy glory live.
    Look what is best, that best I wish in thee:
    This wish I have; then ten times happy me!

XXXVIII

How can my muse want subject to invent,
While thou dost breathe, that pour’st into my verse
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O! give thyself the thanks, if aught in me
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
For who’s so dumb that cannot write to thee,
When thou thyself dost give invention light?
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
    If my slight muse do please these curious days,
    The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.

XXXIX

O! how thy worth with manners may I sing,
When thou art all the better part of me?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?
And what is’t but mine own when I praise thee?
Even for this, let us divided live,
And our dear love lose name of single one,
That by this separation I may give
That due to thee which thou deserv’st alone.
O absence! what a torment wouldst thou prove,
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave,
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,
    And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
    By praising him here who doth hence remain.

XL

Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all;
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more.
Then, if for my love, thou my love receivest,
I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest;
But yet be blam’d, if thou thyself deceivest
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
And yet, love knows it is a greater grief
To bear love’s wrong, than hate’s known injury.
    Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
    Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.

XLI

Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assail’d;
And when a woman woos, what woman’s son
Will sourly leave her till he have prevail’d?
Ay me! but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth,
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:
    Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
    Thine by thy beauty being false to me.

XLII

That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye:
Thou dost love her, because thou know’st I love her;
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
If I lose thee, my loss is my love’s gain,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross:
    But here’s the joy; my friend and I are one;
    Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.

XLIII

When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
For all the day they view things unrespected;
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
How would thy shadow’s form form happy show
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made
By looking on thee in the living day,
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
    All days are nights to see till I see thee,
    And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.

XLIV

If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Injurious distance should not stop my way;
For then despite of space I would be brought,
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.
No matter then although my foot did stand
Upon the farthest earth remov’d from thee;
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
As soon as think the place where he would be.
But, ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
But that so much of earth and water wrought,
I must attend time’s leisure with my moan;
    Receiving nought by elements so slow
    But heavy tears, badges of either’s woe.

XLV

The other two, slight air, and purging fire
Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
The first my thought, the other my desire,
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
For when these quicker elements are gone
In tender embassy of love to thee,
My life, being made of four, with two alone
Sinks down to death, oppress’d with melancholy;
Until life’s composition be recur’d
By those swift messengers return’d from thee,
Who even but now come back again, assur’d,
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:
    This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
    I send them back again, and straight grow sad.

XLVI

Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
Mine eye my heart thy picture’s sight would bar,
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,
A closet never pierced with crystal eyes;
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
To side this title is impannelled
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart;
And by their verdict is determined
The clear eye’s moiety, and the dear heart’s part:
    As thus; mine eye’s due is thy outward part,
    And my heart’s right, thy inward love of heart.

XLVII

Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
And each doth good turns now unto the other:
When that mine eye is famish’d for a look,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
With my love’s picture then my eye doth feast,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
Another time mine eye is my heart’s guest,
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:
So, either by thy picture or my love,
Thyself away, art present still with me;
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
And I am still with them, and they with thee;
    Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
    Awakes my heart, to heart’s and eye’s delight.

XLVIII

How careful was I when I took my way,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
That to my use it might unused stay
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
Thou best of dearest, and mine only care,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Thee have I not lock’d up in any chest,
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
    And even thence thou wilt be stol’n I fear,
    For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.

XLIX

Against that time, if ever that time come,
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
Call’d to that audit by advis’d respects;
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass,
And scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye,
When love, converted from the thing it was,
Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
Against that time do I ensconce me here,
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
And this my hand, against my self uprear,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part:
    To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
    Since why to love I can allege no cause.

L

How heavy do I journey on the way,
When what I seek, my weary travel’s end,
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say,
‘Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!’
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
His rider lov’d not speed, being made from thee:
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
    For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
    My grief lies onward, and my joy behind.

LI

Thus can my love excuse the slow offence
Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
From where thou art why should I haste me thence?
Till I return, of posting is no need.
O! what excuse will my poor beast then find,
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind,
In winged speed no motion shall I know,
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;
Therefore desire, of perfect’st love being made,
Shall neigh no dull flesh in his fiery race,
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade:
    ‘Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
    Towards thee I’ll run, and give him leave to go.’

LII

So am I as the rich, whose blessed key,
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
The which he will not every hour survey,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Since, seldom coming in that long year set,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
To make some special instant special-blest,
By new unfolding his imprison’d pride.
    Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
    Being had, to triumph; being lacked, to hope.

LIII

What is your substance, whereof are you made,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one, hath every one, one shade,
And you but one, can every shadow lend.
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
Is poorly imitated after you;
On Helen’s cheek all art of beauty set,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
The other as your bounty doth appear;
And you in every blessed shape we know.
    In all external grace you have some part,
    But you like none, none you, for constant heart.

LIV

O! how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give.
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
For that sweet odour, which doth in it live.
The canker blooms have full as deep a dye
As the perfumed tincture of the roses.
Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly
When summer’s breath their masked buds discloses:
But, for their virtue only is their show,
They live unwoo’d, and unrespected fade;
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made:
    And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
    When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth.

LV

Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Than unswept stone, besmear’d with sluttish time.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword, nor war’s quick fire shall burn
The living record of your memory.
’Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
    So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
    You live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes.

LVI

Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Which but to-day by feeding is allay’d,
To-morrow sharpened in his former might:
So, love, be thou, although to-day thou fill
Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
To-morrow see again, and do not kill
The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness.
Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new
Come daily to the banks, that when they see
Return of love, more blest may be the view;
    Or call it winter, which being full of care,
    Makes summer’s welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.

LVII

Being your slave what should I do but tend,
Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at all to spend;
Nor services to do, till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
Save, where you are, how happy you make those.
    So true a fool is love, that in your will,
    Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.

LVIII

That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!
O! let me suffer, being at your beck,
The imprison’d absence of your liberty;
And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check,
Without accusing you of injury.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong
That you yourself may privilage your time
To what you will; to you it doth belong
Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
    I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
    Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.

LIX

If there be nothing new, but that which is
Hath been before, how are our brains beguil’d,
Which labouring for invention bear amiss
The second burthen of a former child!
O! that record could with a backward look,
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Show me your image in some antique book,
Since mind at first in character was done!
That I might see what the old world could say
To this composed wonder of your frame;
Wh’r we are mended, or wh’r better they,
Or whether revolution be the same.
    O! sure I am the wits of former days,
    To subjects worse have given admiring praise.

LX

Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
So do our minutes hasten to their end;
Each changing place with that which goes before,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity, once in the main of light,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown’d,
Crooked eclipses ’gainst his glory fight,
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
And delves the parallels in beauty’s brow,
Feeds on the rarities of nature’s truth,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:
    And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand.
    Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.

LXI

Is it thy will, thy image should keep open
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
Is it thy spirit that thou send’st from thee
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake:
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
To play the watchman ever for thy sake:
    For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
    From me far off, with others all too near.

LXII

Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye
And all my soul, and all my every part;
And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
No shape so true, no truth of such account;
And for myself mine own worth do define,
As I all other in all worths surmount.
But when my glass shows me myself indeed
Beated and chopp’d with tanned antiquity,
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read;
Self so self-loving were iniquity.
    ’Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise,
    Painting my age with beauty of thy days.

LXIII

Against my love shall be as I am now,
With Time’s injurious hand crush’d and o’erworn;
When hours have drain’d his blood and fill’d his brow
With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
Hath travell’d on to age’s steepy night;
And all those beauties whereof now he’s king
Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
For such a time do I now fortify
Against confounding age’s cruel knife,
That he shall never cut from memory
My sweet love’s beauty, though my lover’s life:
    His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
    And they shall live, and he in them still green.

LXIV

When I have seen by Time’s fell hand defac’d
The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age;
When sometime lofty towers I see down-raz’d,
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
And the firm soil win of the watery main,
Increasing store with loss, and loss with store;
When I have seen such interchange of state,
Or state itself confounded, to decay;
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate:
That Time will come and take my love away.
    This thought is as a death which cannot choose
    But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.

LXV

Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
But sad mortality o’ersways their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
O! how shall summer’s honey breath hold out,
Against the wrackful siege of battering days,
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Nor gates of steel so strong but Time decays?
O fearful meditation! where, alack,
Shall Time’s best jewel from Time’s chest lie hid?
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
    O! none, unless this miracle have might,
    That in black ink my love may still shine bright.

LXVI

Tired with all these, for restful death I cry:
As to behold desert a beggar born,
And needy nothing trimm’d in jollity,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And gilded honour shamefully misplac’d,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And right perfection wrongfully disgrac’d,
And strength by limping sway disabled
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
And folly, doctor-like, controlling skill,
And simple truth miscall’d simplicity,
And captive good attending captain ill:
    Tir’d with all these, from these would I be gone,
    Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.

LXVII

Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,
And with his presence grace impiety,
That sin by him advantage should achieve,
And lace itself with his society?
Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
And steel dead seeming of his living hue?
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
Beggar’d of blood to blush through lively veins?
For she hath no exchequer now but his,
And proud of many, lives upon his gains.
    O! him she stores, to show what wealth she had
    In days long since, before these last so bad.

LXVIII

Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
Before the golden tresses of the dead,
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
To live a second life on second head;
Ere beauty’s dead fleece made another gay:
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
Without all ornament, itself and true,
Making no summer of another’s green,
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;
    And him as for a map doth Nature store,
    To show false Art what beauty was of yore.

LXIX

Those parts of thee that the world’s eye doth view
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;
All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due,
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown’d;
But those same tongues, that give thee so thine own,
In other accents do this praise confound
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
They look into the beauty of thy mind,
And that in guess they measure by thy deeds;
Then churls their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
    But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
    The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.

LXX

That thou art blam’d shall not be thy defect,
For slander’s mark was ever yet the fair;
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
A crow that flies in heaven’s sweetest air.
So thou be good, slander doth but approve
Thy worth the greater being woo’d of time;
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
And thou present’st a pure unstained prime.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days
Either not assail’d, or victor being charg’d;
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
To tie up envy, evermore enlarg’d,
    If some suspect of ill mask’d not thy show,
    Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.

LXXI

No longer mourn for me when I am dead
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:
Nay, if you read this line, remember not
The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
O if, I say, you look upon this verse,
When I perhaps compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse;
But let your love even with my life decay;
    Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
    And mock you with me after I am gone.

LXXII

O! lest the world should task you to recite
What merit lived in me, that you should love
After my death, dear love, forget me quite,
For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
To do more for me than mine own desert,
And hang more praise upon deceased I
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
O! lest your true love may seem false in this
That you for love speak well of me untrue,
My name be buried where my body is,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
    For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
    And so should you, to love things nothing worth.

LXXIII

That time of year thou mayst in me behold
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruin’d choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou see’st the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the west;
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Death’s second self, that seals up all in rest.
In me thou see’st the glowing of such fire,
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
Consum’d with that which it was nourish’d by.
    This thou perceiv’st, which makes thy love more strong,
    To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.

LXXIV

But be contented: when that fell arrest
Without all bail shall carry me away,
My life hath in this line some interest,
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
The very part was consecrate to thee:
The earth can have but earth, which is his due;
My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
The prey of worms, my body being dead;
The coward conquest of a wretch’s knife,
Too base of thee to be remembered.
    The worth of that is that which it contains,
    And that is this, and this with thee remains.

LXXV

So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Or as sweet-season’d showers are to the ground;
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
As ’twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure;
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Then better’d that the world may see my pleasure:
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
And by and by clean starved for a look;
Possessing or pursuing no delight,
Save what is had, or must from you be took.
    Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
    Or gluttoning on all, or all away.

LXXVI

Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
So far from variation or quick change?
Why with the time do I not glance aside
To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
O! know sweet love I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument;
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Spending again what is already spent:
    For as the sun is daily new and old,
    So is my love still telling what is told.

LXXVII

Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
These vacant leaves thy mind’s imprint will bear,
And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
Thou by thy dial’s shady stealth mayst know
Time’s thievish progress to eternity.
Look! what thy memory cannot contain,
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
Those children nursed, deliver’d from thy brain,
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
    These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
    Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.

LXXVIII

So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse,
And found such fair assistance in my verse
As every alien pen hath got my use
And under thee their poesy disperse.
Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
Have added feathers to the learned’s wing
And given grace a double majesty.
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
Whose influence is thine, and born of thee:
In others’ works thou dost but mend the style,
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;
    But thou art all my art, and dost advance
    As high as learning, my rude ignorance.

LXXIX

Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;
But now my gracious numbers are decay’d,
And my sick Muse doth give an other place.
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen;
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
He robs thee of, and pays it thee again.
He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word
From thy behaviour; beauty doth he give,
And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
    Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
    Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.

LXXX

O! how I faint when I of you do write,
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame!
But since your wort, wide as the ocean is,
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
My saucy bark, inferior far to his,
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride;
Or, being wrack’d, I am a worthless boat,
He of tall building, and of goodly pride:
    Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
    The worst was this: my love was my decay.

LXXXI

Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you entombed in men’s eyes shall lie.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Which eyes not yet created shall o’er-read;
And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
When all the breathers of this world are dead;
    You still shall live, such virtue hath my pen,
    Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.

LXXXII

I grant thou wert not married to my Muse,
And therefore mayst without attaint o’erlook
The dedicated words which writers use
Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise;
And therefore art enforced to seek anew
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
And do so, love; yet when they have devis’d,
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathiz’d
In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend;
    And their gross painting might be better us’d
    Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abus’d.

LXXXIII

I never saw that you did painting need,
And therefore to your fair no painting set;
I found, or thought I found, you did exceed
That barren tender of a poet’s debt:
And therefore have I slept in your report,
That you yourself, being extant, well might show
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
This silence for my sin you did impute,
Which shall be most my glory being dumb;
For I impair not beauty being mute,
When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
    There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
    Than both your poets can in praise devise.

LXXXIV

Who is it that says most, which can say more,
Than this rich praise: that you alone are you,
In whose confine immured is the store
Which should example where your equal grew.
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
That to his subject lends not some small glory;
But he that writes of you, if he can tell
That you are you, so dignifies his story,
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
Making his style admired every where.
    You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
    Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.

LXXXV

My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,
While comments of your praise richly compil’d,
Reserve their character with golden quill,
And precious phrase by all the Muses fil’d.
I think good thoughts, whilst others write good words,
And like unlettered clerk still cry ‘Amen’
To every hymn that able spirit affords,
In polish’d form of well-refined pen.
Hearing you praised, I say ‘’tis so, ’tis true,’
And to the most of praise add something more;
But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.
    Then others, for the breath of words respect,
    Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.

LXXXVI

Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
He, nor that affable familiar ghost
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
As victors of my silence cannot boast;
I was not sick of any fear from thence:
    But when your countenance fill’d up his line,
    Then lacked I matter; that enfeebled mine.

LXXXVII

Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou know’st thy estimate,
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thyself thou gav’st, thy own worth then not knowing,
Or me to whom thou gav’st it, else mistaking;
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
Comes home again, on better judgement making.
    Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
    In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.

LXXXVIII

When thou shalt be dispos’d to set me light,
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
Upon thy side, against myself I’ll fight,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
With mine own weakness, being best acquainted,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
Of faults conceal’d, wherein I am attainted;
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:
And I by this will be a gainer too;
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
The injuries that to myself I do,
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
    Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
    That for thy right, myself will bear all wrong.

LXXXIX

Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
And I will comment upon that offence:
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,
Against thy reasons making no defence.
Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill,
To set a form upon desired change,
As I’ll myself disgrace; knowing thy will,
I will acquaintance strangle, and look strange;
Be absent from thy walks; and in my tongue
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong,
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
    For thee, against my self I’ll vow debate,
    For I must ne’er love him whom thou dost hate.

XC

Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
Ah! do not, when my heart hath ’scap’d this sorrow,
Come in the rearward of a conquer’d woe;
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
To linger out a purpos’d overthrow.
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
When other petty griefs have done their spite,
But in the onset come: so shall I taste
At first the very worst of fortune’s might;
    And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
    Compar’d with loss of thee, will not seem so.

XCI

Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Some in their wealth, some in their body’s force,
Some in their garments though new-fangled ill;
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:
But these particulars are not my measure,
All these I better in one general best.
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments’ costs,
Of more delight than hawks and horses be;
And having thee, of all men’s pride I boast:
    Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
    All this away, and me most wretchcd make.

XCII

But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
For term of life thou art assured mine;
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
When in the least of them my life hath end.
I see a better state to me belongs
Than that which on thy humour doth depend:
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
O! what a happy title do I find,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
    But what’s so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
    Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.

XCIII

So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
Like a deceived husband; so love’s face
May still seem love to me, though alter’d new;
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:
For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
In many’s looks, the false heart’s history
Is writ in moods, and frowns, and wrinkles strange.
But heaven in thy creation did decree
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
Whate’er thy thoughts, or thy heart’s workings be,
Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
    How like Eve’s apple doth thy beauty grow,
    If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!

XCIV

They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
That do not do the thing they most do show,
Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow;
They rightly do inherit heaven’s graces,
And husband nature’s riches from expense;
They are the lords and owners of their faces,
Others, but stewards of their excellence.
The summer’s flower is to the summer sweet,
Though to itself, it only live and die,
But if that flower with base infection meet,
The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
    For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
    Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.

XCV

How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
O! in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose.
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise;
Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
O! what a mansion have those vices got
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Where beauty’s veil doth cover every blot
And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!
    Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
    The hardest knife ill-us’d doth lose his edge.

XCVI

Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;
Both grace and faults are lov’d of more and less:
Thou mak’st faults graces that to thee resort.
As on the finger of a throned queen
The basest jewel will be well esteem’d,
So are those errors that in thee are seen
To truths translated, and for true things deem’d.
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
    But do not so; I love thee in such sort,
    As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

XCVII

How like a winter hath my absence been
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
What old December’s bareness everywhere!
And yet this time removed was summer’s time;
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Like widow’d wombs after their lords’ decease:
Yet this abundant issue seem’d to me
But hope of orphans, and unfather’d fruit;
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And, thou away, the very birds are mute:
    Or, if they sing, ’tis with so dull a cheer,
    That leaves look pale, dreading the winter’s near.

XCVIII

From you have I been absent in the spring,
When proud-pied April, dress’d in all his trim,
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
That heavy Saturn laugh’d and leap’d with him.
Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
Could make me any summer’s story tell,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
Nor did I wonder at the lily’s white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
They were but sweet, but figures of delight,
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
    Yet seem’d it winter still, and you away,
    As with your shadow I with these did play.

XCIX

The forward violet thus did I chide:
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
If not from my love’s breath? The purple pride
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
In my love’s veins thou hast too grossly dy’d.
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
And buds of marjoram had stol’n thy hair;
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
One blushing shame, another white despair;
A third, nor red nor white, had stol’n of both,
And to his robbery had annex’d thy breath;
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
    More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
    But sweet, or colour it had stol’n from thee.

C

Where art thou Muse that thou forget’st so long,
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Spend’st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
Rise, resty Muse, my love’s sweet face survey,
If Time have any wrinkle graven there;
If any, be a satire to decay,
And make time’s spoils despised every where.
    Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
    So thou prevent’st his scythe and crooked knife.

CI

O truant Muse what shall be thy amends
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dy’d?
Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
Make answer Muse: wilt thou not haply say,
‘Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix’d;
Beauty no pencil, beauty’s truth to lay;
But best is best, if never intermix’d’?
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Excuse not silence so, for’t lies in thee
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb
And to be prais’d of ages yet to be.
    Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
    To make him seem long hence as he shows now.

CII

My love is strengthen’d, though more weak in seeming;
I love not less, though less the show appear;
That love is merchandiz’d, whose rich esteeming,
The owner’s tongue doth publish every where.
Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
When I was wont to greet it with my lays;
As Philomel in summer’s front doth sing,
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
But that wild music burthens every bough,
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
    Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue:
    Because I would not dull you with my song.

CIII

Alack! what poverty my Muse brings forth,
That having such a scope to show her pride,
The argument, all bare, is of more worth
Than when it hath my added praise beside!
O! blame me not, if I no more can write!
Look in your glass, and there appears a face
That over-goes my blunt invention quite,
Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,
To mar the subject that before was well?
For to no other pass my verses tend
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;
    And more, much more, than in my verse can sit,
    Your own glass shows you when you look in it.

CIV

To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
For as you were when first your eye I ey’d,
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold,
Have from the forests shook three summers’ pride,
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn’d,
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn’d,
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
Ah! yet doth beauty like a dial-hand,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceiv’d;
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceiv’d:
    For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred:
    Ere you were born was beauty’s summer dead.

CV

Let not my love be call’d idolatry,
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,
Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
Therefore my verse to constancy confin’d,
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
‘Fair, kind, and true,’ is all my argument,
‘Fair, kind, and true,’ varying to other words;
And in this change is my invention spent,
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
    Fair, kind, and true, have often liv’d alone,
    Which three till now, never kept seat in one.

CVI

When in the chronicle of wasted time
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
And beauty making beautiful old rime,
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty’s best,
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I see their antique pen would have express’d
Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophecies
Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
And for they looked but with divining eyes,
They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
    For we, which now behold these present days,
    Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.

CVII

Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Supposed as forfeit to a confin’d doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur’d,
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
Incertainties now crown themselves assur’d,
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes,
Since, spite of him, I’ll live in this poor rime,
While he insults o’er dull and speechless tribes:
    And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
    When tyrants’ crests and tombs of brass are spent.

CVIII

What’s in the brain, that ink may character,
Which hath not figur’d to thee my true spirit?
What’s new to speak, what now to register,
That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
I must each day say o’er the very same;
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
Even as when first I hallow’d thy fair name.
So that eternal love in love’s fresh case,
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
But makes antiquity for aye his page;
    Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
    Where time and outward form would show it dead.

CIX

O! never say that I was false of heart,
Though absence seem’d my flame to qualify,
As easy might I from my self depart
As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:
That is my home of love: if I have rang’d,
Like him that travels, I return again;
Just to the time, not with the time exchang’d,
So that myself bring water for my stain.
Never believe though in my nature reign’d,
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
That it could so preposterously be stain’d,
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;
    For nothing this wide universe I call,
    Save thou, my rose, in it thou art my all.

CX

Alas! ’tis true, I have gone here and there,
And made my self a motley to the view,
Gor’d mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
Made old offences of affections new;
Most true it is, that I have look’d on truth
Askance and strangely; but, by all above,
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
And worse essays prov’d thee my best of love.
Now all is done, save what shall have no end:
Mine appetite I never more will grind
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
A god in love, to whom I am confin’d.
    Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
    Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.

CXI

O! for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
That did not better for my life provide
Than public means which public manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
And almost thence my nature is subdu’d
To what it works in, like the dyer’s hand:
Pity me, then, and wish I were renew’d;
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink,
Potions of eisel ’gainst my strong infection;
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance, to correct correction.
    Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye,
    Even that your pity is enough to cure me.

CXII

Your love and pity doth the impression fill,
Which vulgar scandal stamp’d upon my brow;
For what care I who calls me well or ill,
So you o’er-green my bad, my good allow?
You are my all-the-world, and I must strive
To know my shames and praises from your tongue;
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
That my steel’d sense or changes right or wrong.
In so profound abysm I throw all care
Of others’ voices, that my adder’s sense
To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
    You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
    That all the world besides methinks are dead.

CXIII

Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;
And that which governs me to go about
Doth part his function and is partly blind,
Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
For it no form delivers to the heart
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch:
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch;
For if it see the rud’st or gentlest sight,
The most sweet favour or deformed’st creature,
The mountain or the sea, the day or night:
The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
    Incapable of more, replete with you,
    My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.

CXIV

Or whether doth my mind, being crown’d with you,
Drink up the monarch’s plague, this flattery?
Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
To make of monsters and things indigest
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Creating every bad a perfect best,
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
O! ’tis the first, ’tis flattery in my seeing,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is ’greeing,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup:
    If it be poison’d, ’tis the lesser sin
    That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.

CXV

Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Even those that said I could not love you dearer:
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
But reckoning Time, whose million’d accidents
Creep in ’twixt vows, and change decrees of kings,
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp’st intents,
Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;
Alas! why fearing of Time’s tyranny,
Might I not then say, ‘Now I love you best,’
When I was certain o’er incertainty,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
    Love is a babe, then might I not say so,
    To give full growth to that which still doth grow?

CXVI

Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments. Love is not love
Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove:
O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark,
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
It is the star to every wandering bark,
Whose worth’s unknown, although his height be taken.
Love’s not Time’s fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle’s compass come;
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
    If this be error and upon me prov’d,
    I never writ, nor no man ever lov’d.

CXVII

Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all,
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
That I have frequent been with unknown minds,
And given to time your own dear-purchas’d right;
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
And on just proof surmise, accumulate;
Bring me within the level of your frown,
But shoot not at me in your waken’d hate;
    Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
    The constancy and virtue of your love.

CXVIII

Like as, to make our appetite more keen,
With eager compounds we our palate urge;
As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge;
Even so, being full of your ne’er-cloying sweetness,
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness
To be diseas’d, ere that there was true needing.
Thus policy in love, to anticipate
The ills that were not, grew to faults assur’d,
And brought to medicine a healthful state
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cur’d;
    But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
    Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.

CXIX

What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,
Distill’d from limbecks foul as hell within,
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
Still losing when I saw myself to win!
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted,
In the distraction of this madding fever!
O benefit of ill! now I find true
That better is, by evil still made better;
And ruin’d love, when it is built anew,
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
    So I return rebuk’d to my content,
    And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.

CXX

That you were once unkind befriends me now,
And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammer’d steel.
For if you were by my unkindness shaken,
As I by yours, you’ve pass’d a hell of time;
And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
To weigh how once I suffer’d in your crime.
O! that our night of woe might have remember’d
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
And soon to you, as you to me, then tender’d
The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits!
    But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
    Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.

CXXI

’Tis better to be vile than vile esteem’d,
When not to be receives reproach of being;
And the just pleasure lost, which is so deem’d
Not by our feeling, but by others’ seeing:
For why should others’ false adulterate eyes
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
No, I am that I am, and they that level
At my abuses reckon up their own:
I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown;
    Unless this general evil they maintain,
    All men are bad and in their badness reign.

CXXII

Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
Full character’d with lasting memory,
Which shall above that idle rank remain,
Beyond all date; even to eternity:
Or, at the least, so long as brain and heart
Have faculty by nature to subsist;
Till each to raz’d oblivion yield his part
Of thee, thy record never can be miss’d.
That poor retention could not so much hold,
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
To trust those tables that receive thee more:
    To keep an adjunct to remember thee
    Were to import forgetfulness in me.

CXXIII

No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
They are but dressings of a former sight.
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
What thou dost foist upon us that is old;
And rather make them born to our desire
Than think that we before have heard them told.
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wondering at the present nor the past,
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
Made more or less by thy continual haste.
    This I do vow and this shall ever be;
    I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.

CXXIV

If my dear love were but the child of state,
It might for Fortune’s bastard be unfather’d,
As subject to Time’s love or to Time’s hate,
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather’d.
No, it was builded far from accident;
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
Whereto th’ inviting time our fashion calls:
It fears not policy, that heretic,
Which works on leases of short-number’d hours,
But all alone stands hugely politic,
That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers.
    To this I witness call the fools of time,
    Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.

CXXV

Were’t aught to me I bore the canopy,
With my extern the outward honouring,
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
Lose all and more by paying too much rent
For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour,
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
No; let me be obsequious in thy heart,
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Which is not mix’d with seconds, knows no art,
But mutual render, only me for thee.
    Hence, thou suborned informer! a true soul
    When most impeach’d, stands least in thy control.

CXXVI

O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power
Dost hold Time’s fickle glass, his fickle hour;
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show’st
Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow’st.
If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:
    Her audit (though delayed) answered must be,
    And her quietus is to render thee.

CXXVII

In the old age black was not counted fair,
Or if it were, it bore not beauty’s name;
But now is black beauty’s successive heir,
And beauty slander’d with a bastard shame:
For since each hand hath put on Nature’s power,
Fairing the foul with Art’s false borrowed face,
Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
But is profan’d, if not lives in disgrace.
Therefore my mistress’ eyes are raven black,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
Sland’ring creation with a false esteem:
    Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
    That every tongue says beauty should look so.

CXXVIII

How oft when thou, my music, music play’st,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway’st
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap,
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
At the wood’s boldness by thee blushing stand!
To be so tickled, they would change their state
And situation with those dancing chips,
O’er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
Making dead wood more bless’d than living lips.
    Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
    Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.

CXXIX

The expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Is lust in action: and till action, lust
Is perjur’d, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust;
Enjoy’d no sooner but despised straight;
Past reason hunted; and no sooner had,
Past reason hated, as a swallow’d bait,
On purpose laid to make the taker mad:
Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme;
A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe;
Before, a joy propos’d; behind a dream.
    All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
    To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.

CXXX

My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun;
Coral is far more red, than her lips red:
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
I have seen roses damask’d, red and white,
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
And in some perfumes is there more delight
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
I grant I never saw a goddess go;
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:
    And yet by heaven, I think my love as rare,
    As any she belied with false compare.

CXXXI

Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
For well thou know’st to my dear doting heart
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold,
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
To say they err I dare not be so bold,
Although I swear it to myself alone.
And to be sure that is not false I swear,
A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,
One on another’s neck, do witness bear
Thy black is fairest in my judgment’s place.
    In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
    And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.

CXXXII

Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
Have put on black and loving mourners be,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
And truly not the morning sun of heaven
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
Nor that full star that ushers in the even,
Doth half that glory to the sober west,
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
O! let it then as well beseem thy heart
To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
And suit thy pity like in every part.
    Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
    And all they foul that thy complexion lack.

CXXXIII

Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!
Is’t not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweet’st friend must be?
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
And my next self thou harder hast engross’d:
Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken;
A torment thrice three-fold thus to be cross’d:
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom’s ward,
But then my friend’s heart let my poor heart bail;
Whoe’er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;
Thou canst not then use rigour in my jail:
    And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
    Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.

CXXXIV

So, now I have confess’d that he is thine,
And I my self am mortgag’d to thy will,
Myself I’ll forfeit, so that other mine
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
For thou art covetous, and he is kind;
He learn’d but surety-like to write for me,
Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
Thou usurer, that putt’st forth all to use,
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
    Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:
    He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.

CXXXV

Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy ‘Will,’
And ‘Will’ to boot, and ‘Will’ in over-plus;
More than enough am I that vex’d thee still,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
The sea, all water, yet receives rain still,
And in abundance addeth to his store;
So thou, being rich in ‘Will,’ add to thy ‘Will’
One will of mine, to make thy large will more.
    Let no unkind ‘No’ fair beseechers kill;
    Think all but one, and me in that one ‘Will.’

CXXXVI

If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy ‘Will’,
And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;
Thus far for love, my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.
‘Will’, will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
In things of great receipt with ease we prove
Among a number one is reckon’d none:
Then in the number let me pass untold,
Though in thy store’s account I one must be;
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee:
    Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
    And then thou lov’st me for my name is ‘Will.’

CXXXVII

Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
That they behold, and see not what they see?
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
If eyes, corrupt by over-partial looks,
Be anchor’d in the bay where all men ride,
Why of eyes’ falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
Why should my heart think that a several plot,
Which my heart knows the wide world’s common place?
Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not,
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
    In things right true my heart and eyes have err’d,
    And to this false plague are they now transferr’d.

CXXXVIII

When my love swears that she is made of truth,
I do believe her though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutor’d youth,
Unlearned in the world’s false subtleties.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue:
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
O! love’s best habit is in seeming trust,
And age in love, loves not to have years told:
    Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
    And in our faults by lies we flatter’d be.

CXXXIX

O! call not me to justify the wrong
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
Wound me not with thine eye, but with thy tongue:
Use power with power, and slay me not by art,
Tell me thou lov’st elsewhere; but in my sight,
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:
What need’st thou wound with cunning, when thy might
Is more than my o’erpress’d defence can bide?
Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies;
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
    Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
    Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.


CXL

Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;
Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
Though not to love, yet love to tell me so,
As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
No news but health from their physicians know.
For, if I should despair, I should grow mad,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee;
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
    That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
    Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.

CXLI

In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes,
For they in thee a thousand errors note;
But ’tis my heart that loves what they despise,
Who, in despite of view, is pleased to dote.
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue’s tune delighted;
Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
To any sensual feast with thee alone:
But my five wits nor my five senses can
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Who leaves unsway’d the likeness of a man,
Thy proud heart’s slave and vassal wretch to be:
    Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
    That she that makes me sin awards me pain.

CXLII

Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
O! but with mine compare thou thine own state,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,
That have profan’d their scarlet ornaments
And seal’d false bonds of love as oft as mine,
Robb’d others’ beds’ revenues of their rents.
Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lov’st those
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows,
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
    If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
    By self-example mayst thou be denied!

CXLIII

Lo, as a careful housewife runs to catch
One of her feather’d creatures broke away,
Sets down her babe, and makes all swift dispatch
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay;
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
To follow that which flies before her face,
Not prizing her poor infant’s discontent;
So runn’st thou after that which flies from thee,
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,
And play the mother’s part, kiss me, be kind;
    So will I pray that thou mayst have thy ‘Will,’
    If thou turn back and my loud crying still.

CXLIV

Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still:
The better angel is a man right fair,
The worser spirit a woman colour’d ill.
To win me soon to hell, my female evil,
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And whether that my angel be turn’d fiend,
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
But being both from me, both to each friend,
I guess one angel in another’s hell:
    Yet this shall I ne’er know, but live in doubt,
    Till my bad angel fire my good one out.

CXLV

Those lips that Love’s own hand did make,
Breathed forth the sound that said ‘I hate’,
To me that languish’d for her sake:
But when she saw my woeful state,
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
Was us’d in giving gentle doom;
And taught it thus anew to greet;
‘I hate’ she alter’d with an end,
That followed it as gentle day,
Doth follow night, who like a fiend
From heaven to hell is flown away.
    ‘I hate’, from hate away she threw,
    And sav’d my life, saying ‘not you’.

CXLVI

Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body’s end?
Then soul, live thou upon thy servant’s loss,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
Within be fed, without be rich no more:
    So shall thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
    And Death once dead, there’s no more dying then.

CXLVII

My love is as a fever longing still,
For that which longer nurseth the disease;
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
The uncertain sickly appetite to please.
My reason, the physician to my love,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Past cure I am, now Reason is past care,
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen’s are,
At random from the truth vainly express’d;
    For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
    Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.

CXLVIII

O me! what eyes hath Love put in my head,
Which have no correspondence with true sight;
Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,
That censures falsely what they see aright?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
What means the world to say it is not so?
If it be not, then love doth well denote
Love’s eye is not so true as all men’s: no,
How can it? O! how can Love’s eye be true,
That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
No marvel then, though I mistake my view;
The sun itself sees not, till heaven clears.
    O cunning Love! with tears thou keep’st me blind,
    Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.

CXLIX

Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not,
When I against myself with thee partake?
Do I not think on thee, when I forgot
Am of my self, all tyrant, for thy sake?
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend,
On whom frown’st thou that I do fawn upon,
Nay, if thou lour’st on me, do I not spend
Revenge upon myself with present moan?
What merit do I in my self respect,
That is so proud thy service to despise,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
    But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;
    Those that can see thou lov’st, and I am blind.

CL

O! from what power hast thou this powerful might,
With insufficiency my heart to sway?
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
O! though I love what others do abhor,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:
    If thy unworthiness rais’d love in me,
    More worthy I to be belov’d of thee.

CLI

Love is too young to know what conscience is,
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:
For, thou betraying me, I do betray
My nobler part to my gross body’s treason;
My soul doth tell my body that he may
Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason,
But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
    No want of conscience hold it that I call
    Her ‘love,’ for whose dear love I rise and fall.

CLII

In loving thee thou know’st I am forsworn,
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing;
In act thy bed-vow broke, and new faith torn,
In vowing new hate after new love bearing:
But why of two oaths’ breach do I accuse thee,
When I break twenty? I am perjur’d most;
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee,
And all my honest faith in thee is lost:
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy;
And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,
Or made them swear against the thing they see;
    For I have sworn thee fair; more perjured I,
    To swear against the truth so foul a lie.

CLIII

Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep:
A maid of Dian’s this advantage found,
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;
Which borrow’d from this holy fire of Love,
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
And grew a seeting bath, which yet men prove
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
But at my mistress’ eye Love’s brand new-fired,
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,
And thither hied, a sad distemper’d guest,
    But found no cure, the bath for my help lies
    Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress’ eyes.

CLIV

The little Love-god lying once asleep,
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
Whilst many nymphs that vow’d chaste life to keep
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
The fairest votary took up that fire
Which many legions of true hearts had warm’d;
And so the general of hot desire
Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarm’d.
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
Which from Love’s fire took heat perpetual,
Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
For men diseas’d; but I, my mistress’ thrall,
    Came there for cure and this by that I prove,
    Love’s fire heats water, water cools not love.

The temperature of accessible surfaces may be hot whilst the toaster is operating.
Never cover the toaster with anything. If covered, the toaster and/or items
covering the toaster, may ignite.
1. Read all instructions carefully before using your new toaster. Save these
instructions.
2. Always use this toaster with a power outlet of the voltage (A.C. only) marked on
the back of the appliance.
3. DANGER Do not operate toaster if:
i) the cord or plug is split, melted or damaged.
ii) the appliance has malfunctioned.
iii) the appliance has been damaged in any manner.
If any of the above incidents occur, return the toaster to the nearest authorized service
center for examination, repair or adjustment.
4. DANGER Never cover the toaster with anything. This will cause the toaster to
overheat, causing irreparable damage and may interfere with the automatic on/
off functions. If covered, the toaster and/or items covering the toaster, may ignite.
5. DANGER Bread can burn. Do not use the toaster near flammable materials. Do
not place the toaster close to curtains or other materials that could easily catch
fire. The toaster should not be left unattended when in operation.
6. DANGER Do not under any circumstances immerse the toaster, mains cord or
mains plug in water or any other liquid.
7. WARNING Incorrect operation and improper use may damage the toaster or
parts thereof, and cause severe personal injury.
8. WARNING When operating the toaster, use loading handle and buttons only
as some surfaces will become hot whilst the toaster is in use.
9. WARNING Never force bread into the toasting slots. Never toast slices of
bread that have been buttered. Take extra care when toasting items that contain
sugar, jam, preserves, raisins or other bits of fruit, as there is a risk of overheating.
Don’t use bent, damaged or broken bread slices in your toaster as it may get
jammed in the slot.
10. WARNING Never attempt to remove bread or other items which have become
jammed in the slots without first unplugging the toaster from the mains supply.
Be careful not to damage the internal mechanism or heating elements when
removing the jammed items.
11. WARNING Never use metal objects to remove jammed items from the toaster.
12. CAUTION The power plug must be removed from the outlet before the
emptying the crumb tray.
13. CAUTION The toaster should not be left unattended while in operation.
Unplug the appliance from mains before cleaning, immediately after use, when
moving it to storage and when not in use.
years old.
15. This toaster is not intended for use by persons (including children) with reduced
physical, sensory or metal capabilities or lack of experience and knowledge,
unless they have been given supervision or instruction concerning use of the
toaster in a safe way by the person responsible for their safety, and understand
the hazards involved.
16. Children should be supervised not to play with the toaster.
17. Always turn the power off at the power outlet before you insert or remove the
power plug. Remove by grasping the plug - do not pull on the cord.
18. This appliance is intended for non-commercial, indoors use only. Do not use this
appliance for anything other than its intended use.
19. Always use the appliance on a stable, secure, dry and level surface.
20. This toaster is not intended to be operated by means of an external timer or
separate remote-control system.
21. Wait for the toaster to cool before moving. Carry only by the outer side panels.
22. Close supervision is necessary when any appliance is used by or near children.
23. Never lift the toaster by placing your fingers inside or near the bread slot.
24. The toaster should not be used whilst under a cupboard or close to a wall as
scorching of the cupboard or may occur as a result.
25. It is important that crumbs are not allowed to build up inside the toaster, as this is
unhygienic and may cause a fire hazard. Crumbs can be easily removed by simply
sliding open the crumb tray located at the rear lower section of the toaster. Once
the crumb tray has been removed from the toaster, it may be emptied. Always
ensure the toaster is completely cool and disconnected from the mains before
carrying out this operation. Never touch the internal parts of the toaster with a
brush or any other implement.
26. Do not place your toaster on or near a hot gas flame, electric element, heated
oven or any hot surface.
27. Do not place the toaster on top of any other appliance.
28. Do not permit the mains supply cord or plug to touch the hot toaster or other hot
objects, or allow the power cord to lay across the toaster.
29. Do not allow the power cord of this appliance to hang over the edge of a table or
bench top.
30. Do not use harsh or abrasive cleaning agents or any sharp instruments for
cleaning the unit. When the unit is cool to touch, the outside surface may be
wiped clean with a soft, damp cloth and then dried thoroughly.
31. Immediately unplug the toaster from mains power if malfunction occurs.
32. Any appliance that has been dropped or damaged should not be used until
examined by an authorized service center.
33. If the mains supply cord is damaged, it must be replaced by the manufacturer, its
service agent or a similarly qualified person in order to avoid a hazard.
34. After use, allow the toaster to cool down approximately 30 minutes before
handling or cleaning the appliance.
35. Always ensure that the toaster has completely cooled down before storing.
POWER SUPPLY CORD
1. Do not attempt to modify the power cord or plug in any way.
2. A short power supply cord is provided to reduce the risk of becoming entangled
in or tripping over a longer cord.
3. If the power supply cord is too short, do not use an extension cord. Have a
qualified electrician or serviceman install an outlet near the appliance.
NOTE: Neither Westinghouse nor the retailer can accept any liability for damage
to the product or personal injury resulting due to failure to observe the electrical
connection procedures.
Carefully unpack the toaster.
2. Carefully remove packaging from inside the toaster slots and around the power
cord. Straighten the power cord and do not remove warning labels.
3. To remove any dust that may have accumulated during packaging, you may wipe
down the external sections of the appliance with a soft dry cloth.
4. Do not use harsh detergents or abrasive cleansers on any part of the toaster.
5. Do not use toaster near combustible materials such as paper, curtains etc.
6. The toaster should not be used whilst under a cupboard or close to a wall as
scorching of the wall or cupboard may occur. Position toaster accordingly.
DANGER Never cover the toaster with anything. This will cause the toaster to
overheat, causing irreparable damage and may interfere with the automatic on/off
functions. If covered, the toaster and/or items covering the toaster, may ignite.
DANGER Bread can burn. Do not use the toaster near flammable materials. Do not
place the toaster close to curtains or other materials that could easily catch fire. The
toaster should not be left unattended when in operation.
DANGER Do not under any circumstances immerse the toaster, mains cord or
mains plug in water or any other liquid.
REHEAT FUNCTION (Refer to Pg 5)
If left for too long after toasting, the bread may become cold. It may be reheated
by pressing the loading handle down and pressing the reheat button to activate the
reheat function.
DEFROST FUNCTION (Refer to Pg 5)
When using bread straight from the freezer, the defrost function may be used. Set
the browning control to the desired browning position and press the loading handle
down. After the loading handle has been pressed down, press the defrost button.
Ensure to watch the bread in case of burning.
CANCEL BUTTON (Refer to Pg 5)
The Cancel button will immediately stop your toasting cycles. Once pressed, all
elements will cease heating and your bread/bagel will pop back up.
HIGH LIFT LEVER (Refer to Pg 5)
The high lift lever is designed to lift breads, bagels and crumpets higher than the
original preset level allowing extraction of small slices of bread or crumpets with ease.
Once the toasting cycle has finished and the lever has popped up to its standard
preset position, simply push the lever further upwards for additional lift and extract
your toasted items
Operate the toaster twice on a light setting with no bread to disperse the initial
element burning smell. Make sure the room is well ventilated. Once this step has
been completed, do not use the toaster without bread slices occupying toaster
slots as overheating may occur.
2. Place two slices of bread in the bread slots and press the handle down until it
latches. The bread will be lowered into the toaster and the toasting cycle will
begin.
NOTE: The handle will not latch if the unit is not connected to the mains, and may not
latch if the browning control is set to its minimum position.
3. If the toast starts to burn or smoke before it has popped up, toasting can be
stopped by pressing the ‘Cancel’ button.
4. If you should find that the toast is not dark enough you may wish to toast the bread
again. Turn the browning control down and keep a careful eye on the toaster to
ensure that the toast does not burn. Remember to increase the browning control
setting for subsequent operations. If the toast is too dark, reduce the browning
control before toasting the next slice.
NOTE: Remember that dry or thin slices will toast quicker than moist or thick slices.
Using a lower browning control setting for thinner slices is recommended. When
toasting two slices at the same time, try to use the same size and consistency of bread
to achieve equal browning.
5. When toasting has finished the handle will rapidly rise to the fully raised position.
The toasted bread can now be removed and the toaster is ready to recommence
toasting. Should the toast not be accessible from the standard pop up position,
the extra lift function may be used. Simply push the lever upwards to activate the
high lift function and remove toasted items.
6. Avoid using the toaster on the maximum browning control setting. Most breads
toast well below the 4 setting.
7. When toasting smaller slices of bread, use of the high lift lever function may be
required. Once the toasting cycle has finished and the lever has popped up to its
standard preset position, simply push the lever further upwards for additional lift
and extract your toasted items.
8. For Reheat, Cancel and Defrost functions, please refer page 6.
DANGER Never cover the toaster with anything. This will cause the toaster to
overheat, causing irreparable damage and may interfere with the automatic on/off
functions. If covered, the toaster and/or items covering the toaster, may ignite.
DANGER Bread can burn. Do not use the toaster near flammable materials. Do not
place the toaster close to curtains or other materials that could easily catch fire. The
toaster should not be left unattended when in operation.
WARNING Never force bread into the toasting slots. Never toast slices of bread
that have been buttered. Take extra care when toasting items that contain sugar, jam,
preserves, raisins or other bits of fruit, as there is a risk of overheating. Don’t use bent,
damaged or broken bread slices in your toaster as it may get jammed in the slot.
WARNING When operating the toaster, use loading handle and buttons only as
some surfaces will become hot whilst the toaster is in use. 
Toasting is a combination of cooking and drying the bread.
2. Moisture levels differ from one bread to another which can result in varying
toasting times.
3. For slightly dry bread, use a lower setting than normal.
4. For fresh bread or whole wheat, use a higher setting than normal.
5. Breads with very uneven surfaces will require a higher setting.
6. Thickly cut pieces of bread (including crumpets) may take significantly longer to
toast since more moisture must be evaporated from the bread before toasting
can occur. Very thick pieces may require two cycles.
7. When toasting raisin or other fruit breads, remove any loose raisins from the
surface of the bread before placing into the toaster. This will help prevent pieces
from falling into the toaster, sticking on the guard wire in the slot or burning
inside the toaster.
8. Uneven toasting is usually due to bread slices of uneven thickness.
WARNING Never force bread into the toasting slots. Never toast slices of bread
that have been buttered. Take extra care when toasting items that contain sugar, jam,
preserves, raisins or other bits of fruit, as there is a risk of overheating. Don’t use bent,
damaged or broken bread slices in your toaster as it may get jammed in the slot.
Ensure the power is set to OFF and the unit has been allowed to cool. Be sure
to remove the mains plug from the power outlet before proceeding to clean your
toaster
1. The exterior of your toaster may be cleaned with a soft damp cloth and polished
with a dry soft cloth if necessary. Do not use abrasive cloths or cleaning agents.
2. Dispose of crumbs by sliding out the removable crumb tray and emptying.
Regular cleaning of the crumb tray is required as accumulation of crumbs may
pose a fire hazard.
3. Additional cleaning and/or disposal of crumbs may be achieved by turning the
appliance upside down over the sink whilst gently shaking. Any additional debris
or crumbs should fall out and can be washed down the sink.
DANGER Never immerse the toaster, mains cord or mains plug in water or any
other liquid.
WARNING Never attempt to remove bread or other items which have become
jammed in the slots without first unplugging the toaster from the mains supply. Be
careful not to damage the internal mechanism or heating elements when removing
the jammed items.
WARNING Never use metal objects to remove jammed items from the toaster.
CAUTION The
Nothing in this Warranty affects the Consumer’s rights under the Australian
Consumer law. The benefits to the Consumer under this Warranty are in addition
to the rights and remedies of the buyer under any Consumer Guarantees. The
Australian Consumer Law requires that we confirm that:
Our goods come with guarantees that cannot be excluded under the Australian
Consumer Law. You are entitled to a replacement or refund for a major failure
and for compensation for any other reasonably foreseeable loss or damage. You
are also entitled to have the goods repaired or replaced if the goods fail to be of
acceptable quality and the failure does not amount to a major failure.
2. Subject to Clause 1, the Seller warrants that Westinghouse branded products will
be free of manufacturing defects and will perform to the Seller’s specifications
subject to the following clauses.
3. The benefit of this Warranty extends only to the owner of the property in which
the Products manufactured or supplied by the Seller are installed and used by the
owner for the duration of the Warranty Period.
4. The Warranty commences on the date of the purchase of the product and
continues for the benefit of the Owner for the Warranty Period. If within the
Warranty Period a manufacturing defect is discovered in the Product, or the
Product fails to perform to the Seller’s specifications as a result of some defect in
material or workmanship in the Product, then the Seller will at its own discretion:
a.) Repair or replace the Product at the cost of the Seller, including but not
limited to labour and travel costs. Goods repaired or replaced under this
Warranty will be warranted for the remaining period of the Warranty.
b.) Refund the purchase price paid by the consumer.
5. The Warranty does not apply to Product that :
a.) Has failed due to excessive wear and tear beyond what is considered to be
reasonable.
b.) Has been misused or neglected.
c.) Has been damaged accidentally or by acts of God including fire and flooding.
d.) Has been used or operated contrary to operating or maintenance instructions.
e.) Has been damaged by the Consumer or a third party authorised to act for the
consumer in transit from the Sellers store to the Consumer.
6. In order to make a claim under the Warranty, the Owner must, where possible
return the goods to the Seller’s store at the Owner’s cost. Proof of purchase must
be supplied in all cases.
7. The seller will examine any returned Products and if the Seller determines that
there is an apparent defect through no fault of the Owner, the Seller will:
a.) Make note of the Owner’s contact details including the Owner’s telephone
number which the owner can be contacted during business hours, postal
address and e-mail address. 
) Make note of the defects reported by the Owner.
c.) Take back the defective goods from the owner and determine within a
reasonable time through dialogue with the Seller whether the goods are
defective.
d.) Advise the owner within a reasonable time frame whether it accepts or
rejects the Product claim.
e.) If the Seller accepts the return of the Product, the Seller must arrange to have
i) The Product repaired or,
ii) Replace the damaged or faulty Product or,
iii) Refund the purchase price.
8. The Seller will not accept any returned Product which has not been returned
strictly in accordance with this Warranty.
9. For the purpose of this Warranty:
a.) Australian Consumer Law means the law as set out in Schedule 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010 (Cth).
b.) Consumer means the Purchaser of goods from the seller.
c.) Consumer means a Consumer as that term is set out in section 3 of the
Australian Consumer Law.
d.) Consumer Guarantees means the guarantees under the Australian Consumer
Law.
e.) Implied terms means any guarantees, conditions, warranties or other terms
implied by any Australian Commonwealth, State or Territory laws, (excluding
the Australian Consumer Law) or the law of any other jurisdiction.
f.) Owner has the meaning set out in clause 3.
g.) Warranty means this warranty.
h.) Product means the Product/s bought by the Owner from the Seller that fall
under this warranty.
i.) Warranty Period means:
i) In relation to Cast Iron Cookware: 3 Year Limited Warranty.
ii) In relation to Non-Stick Cookware: 3 Year Limited Warranty
iii) In relation to Cooking Utensils: 3 Year Limited Warranty
iv) In relation to Knives/Knife Block Sets: 3 Year Limited Warranty
v) In relation to Stainless Steel Cookware: 10 Year Limited Warranty
vi) In relation to Chopping boards: 1 Year Limited Warranty
vi) In relation to Small Appliances: 1 Year Limited WarrantyINTRODUCTION

Byron was actually the third Scotsman in about fifty years who
awoke and found himself famous; the sudden rise from obscurity to
international fame had been experienced earlier by two fellow
countrymen, Sir Walter Scott and James Macpherson. Considering the
greatness of the reputation of the two younger writers, it may seem
strange to link their names with Macpherson's, but in the early
nineteenth century it would not have seemed so odd. In fact, as
young men both Scott and Byron would have probably have been
flattered by such an association. Scott tells us that in his youth
he "devoured rather than perused" Ossian and that he could repeat
whole duans "without remorse"; and, as I shall discuss later,
Byron paid Macpherson the high compliment of writing an imitation
of Ossian, which he published in _Hours of Idleness_.

The publication of the modest and anonymous pamphlet, _Fragments
of Ancient Poetry_ marks the beginning of Macpherson's rise to
fame, and concomitantly the start of a controversy that is unique
in literary history. For the half-century that followed, the body
of poetry that was eventually collected as _The Poems of Ossian_
provoked the comment of nearly every important man of letters.
Extravagance and partisanship were characteristic of most of the
remarks, but few literary men were indifferent.

The intensity and duration of the controversy are indicative
of how seriously Macpherson's work was taken, for it was to many
readers of the day daring, original, and passionate. Even Malcolm
Laing, whose ardor in exposing Macpherson's imposture exceeded
that of Dr. Johnson, responded to the literary quality of the poems.
In a note on the fourth and fifth "Fragments" the arch prosecutor
of Macpherson commented,

"From a singular coincidence of circumstances, it was in
this house, where I now write, that I first read the poems
in my early youth, with an ardent credulity that remained
unshaken for many years of my life; and with a pleasure
to which even the triumphant satisfaction of detecting the
imposture is comparatively nothing. The enthusiasm with
which I read and studied the poems, enabled me afterwards,
when my suspicions were once awakened, to trace and expose
the deception with greater success. Yet, notwithstanding
the severity of minute criticism, I can still peruse them
as a wild and wonderful assemblage of imitation with which
the fancy is often pleased and gratified, even when the
judgment condemns them most."[2]



II

It was John Home, famous on both sides of the Tweed as the
author of _Douglas_, who first encouraged Macpherson to undertake
his translations. While taking the waters at Moffat in the fall of
1759, he was pleased to meet a young Highland tutor, who was not
only familiar with ancient Gaelic poetry but who had in his possession
several such poems. Home, like nearly all of the Edinburgh
literati, knew no Gaelic and asked Macpherson to translate
one of them. The younger man at first protested that a translation
"would give a very imperfect idea of the original," but Home "with
some difficulty" persuaded him to try. In a "day or two" Macpherson
brought him the poem that was to become "Fragment VII" in
this collection; Home was so much pleased with it that he requested
additional translations.[3]

"Jupiter" Carlyle, whose autobiography reflects the keen interest
that he took in literature, arrived at Moffat after Home had
seen the "translations."  Home, he found, "had been highly delighted
with them," and when Carlyle read them he "was perfectly
astonished at the poetical genius" that they displayed. They
agreed that "it was a precious discovery, and that as soon as possible
it should be published to the world."[4]

When Home left Moffat he took his find to Edinburgh and showed
the translations to the men who earned the city Smollett's sobriquet,
a "hotbed of genius": Robertson, fresh from the considerable success
of his two volume _History of Scotland_ (1759); Robert Fergusson,
recently appointed professor of natural history at the University
of Edinburgh; Lord Elibank, a learned aristocrat, who had
been patron to Home and Robertson; and Hugh Blair, famous for the
sermons that he delivered as rector of the High Church of St. Giles.
Home was gratified that these men were "no less pleased" with
Macpherson's work than he had been. David Hume and David Dalrymple
(later Lord Hailes) were soon apprised of the discovery and
joined in the chorus of approbation that emanated from the Scottish
capitol.

Blair became the spokesman and the leader for the Edinburgh
literati, and for the next forty years he lavished his energy in praising
and defending Macpherson's work. The translations came to
him at the time that he was writing his lectures on _belles lettres_
and was thus in the process of formulating his theories on the origins
of poetry and the nature of the sublime. Blair lost no time in
communicating with Macpherson:

"I being as much struck as Mr Home with the high spirit of poetry
which breathed in them, presently made inquiry where Mr. Macpherson
was to be found; and having sent for him to come to me, had much
conversation with him on the subject."[5]

Macpherson told Blair that there were "greater and more considerable
poems of the same strain" still extant in the Highlands; Blair like
Home was eager for more, but Macpherson again declined to translate them.
He said that he felt himself inadequate to render "the spirit and force"
of the originals and that "they would be very ill relished by the public
as so very different from the strain of modern ideas, and of modern,
connected, and polished poetry." This whetted Blair's interest even more,
and after "repeated importunity" he persuaded Macpherson to translate
more fragments. The result was the present volume, which Blair saw to
the press and for which he wrote the Preface "in consequence of the
conversations" that he had with Macpherson.[6]

Most of Blair's Preface does seem to be based on information supplied
by Macpherson, for Blair had almost no first-hand knowledge about
Highland poetry or its traditions. It is apparent from the Preface then,
that Macpherson had not yet decided to ascribe the poems to a single
poet; Ossian is one of the principal poets in the collection but the
whole is merely ascribed "to the bards" (see pp. v-vi). It is also
evident from the Preface that Macpherson was shifting from the
reluctant "translator" of a few "fragments" to the projector of a
full-length epic "if enough encouragement were given for such an
undertaking."

Since Blair became famous for his _Critical Dissertation on the
Poems of Ossian_ (London, 1763), it may seem strange that in the
Preface to the _Fragments_ he declined to say anything of the "poetical
merit" of the collection. The frank adulation of the longer
essay, which concludes with the brave assertion that Ossian may
be placed "among those whose works are to last for ages,"[7]  was
partially a reflection of the enthusiasm that greeted each of
Macpherson's successive publications.



III

Part of the appeal of the _Fragments_ was obviously based on
the presumption that they were, as Blair hastened to assure the
reader, "genuine remains of ancient Scottish poetry," and therefore
provided a remarkable insight into a remote, primitive culture; here
were maidens and warriors who lived in antiquity on the harsh,
wind-swept wastes of the Highlands, but they were capable of
highly refined and sensitive expressions of grief--they were the
noblest savages of them all. For some readers the rumors of imposture
served to dampen their initial enthusiasm, and such was
the case with Hume, Walpole, and Boswell, but many of the admirers
of the poems found them rapturous, authentic or not.

After Gray had read several of the "Fragments" in manuscript
he wrote to Thomas Warton that he had "gone mad about them"; he
added,

  "I was so struck, so _extasié_ with their infinite beauty, that
  I writ into Scotland to make a thousand enquiries....
  The whole external evidence would make one believe
  these fragments (for so he calls them, tho' nothing can
  be more entire) counterfeit:  but the internal is so strong
  on the other side, that I am resolved to believe them genuine
  spite of the Devil & the Kirk."

Gray concluded his remarks with the assertion that "this Man is
the very Demon of Poetry, or he has lighted on a treasure hid for
ages."[8]

Nearly fifty years later Byron wrote a "humble imitation" of
Ossian for the admirers of Macpherson's work and presented it as
evidence of his "attachment to their favorite author," even though
he was aware of the imposture. In a note to "The Death of Calmar
and Orla," he commented,

"I fear Laing's late edition has completely overthrown every
hope that Macpherson's Ossian might prove the translation
of a series of poems complete in themselves; but while the
imposture is discovered, the merit of the work remains undisputed,
though not without faults--particularly, in some parts, turgid
and bombastic diction."[9]

In 1819 Hazlitt felt that Ossian is "a feeling and a name that
can never be destroyed in the minds of his readers," and he classed
the work as one of the four prototypes of poetry along with the Bible,
Homer, and Dante. On the question of authenticity he observed,

"If it were indeed possible to shew that this writer was nothing,
it would be another instance of mutability, another blank
made, another void left in the heart, another confirmation of
that feeling which makes him so often complain, 'Roll on, ye
dark brown years, ye bring no joy on your wing to Ossian!'"[10]

There is some justice in Macpherson's wry assertion that
"those who have doubted my veracity have paid a compliment to
my genius."[11] By examining briefly the distinctive form of the
"Fragments," their diction, their setting, their tone, and their
structure, we may sense something of the qualities of the poems
that made them attractive to such men as Gray, Byron, and Hazlitt.



IV

Perhaps Macpherson's most important innovation was to cast
his work into what his contemporaries called "measured prose,"
and it was recognized early that this new form contributed greatly
to their appeal. In discussing the _Fragments_, Ramsey of Ochtertyre
commented,

"Nothing could be more happy or judicious than his translating in
measured prose; for had he attempted it in verse, much of the spirit
of the original would have evaporated, supposing him to have had
talents and industry to perform that very arduous task upon a great
scale. This small publication drew the attention of the literary
world to a new species of poetry."[12]

For his new species of poetry Macpherson drew upon the stylistic
techniques of the King James Version of the Bible, just as Blake
and Whitman were to do later. As Bishop Lowth was the first to
point out, parallelism is the basic structural technique.
Macpherson incorporated two principal forms of parallelism in his poems:
_repetition_, a pattern in which the second line nearly restates the
sense of the first, and _completion_ in which the second line picks
up part of the sense of the first line and adds to it. These are
both common in the _Fragments_, but a few examples may be useful.
I have rearranged the following lines and in the other passages relating
to the structure of the poems in order to call attention to
the binary quality of Macpherson's verse:

_Repetition_

   Who can reach the source of thy race, O Connal?
   And who recount thy Fathers? ("Fragment V")


   Oscur my son came down;
   The mighty in battle descended. ("Fragment VI")


   Oscur stood forth to meet him;
   My son would meet the foe. ("Fragment VIII")


   Future times shall hear of thee;
   They shall hear of the fallen Morar. ("Fragment XII")


_Completion_

   What voice is that I hear?
   That voice like the summer wind. ("Fragment I")

     The warriours saw her, and loved;
     Their souls were fixed on the maid.
     Each loved her, as his fame;
     Each must possess her or die.
     But her soul was fixed on Oscur;
     My son was the youth of her love.      ("Fragment VII")

Macpherson also used grammatical parallelism as a structural device; a
series of simple sentences is often used to describe a landscape:

     Autumn is dark on the mountains;
     Grey mist rests on the hills.
     The whirlwind is heard on the heath.
     Dark rolls the river through the narrow plain.   ("Fragment V")

The poems also have a discernible rhythmical pattern; the
tendency of the lines to form pairs is obvious enough when there
is semantic or grammatical parallelism, but there is a general binary
pattern throughout. Typically, the first unit is a simple sentence,
the second almost any grammatical structure--an appositive,
a prepositional phrase, a participle, the second element of a compound
verb, a dependent clause. A simile--in grammatical terms,
an adverbial phrase--sometimes constitutes the second element.
These pairs are often balanced roughly by the presence of two,
three, or four accents in each constituent; there are a large number
of imbedded iambic and anapestic feet, which give the rhythm an
ascending quality:

  The da/ughter of R/inval was n/ear;

  Crim/ora, br/ight in the arm/our of m/an;

  Her ha/ir loose beh/ind,

  Her b/ow in her h/and.

  She f/ollowed the y/outh to w/ar,

  Co/nnal her m/uch bel/oved.

  She dr/ew the st/ring on D/argo;

  But e/rring pi/erced her C/onnal.      ("Fragment V")

As E. H. W. Meyerstein pointed out, "Macpherson can, without
extravagance, be regarded as the main originator (after the translators
of the Authorized Version) of what's known as 'free verse."[13]
Macpherson's work certainly served to stimulate prosodic experimentation
during the next half century; it is certainly no coincidence that two of
the boldest innovators, Blake and Coleridge, were admirers of
Macpherson's work.

Macpherson's diction must have also appealed to the growing
taste for poetry that was less ornate and studied. His practice
was to use a large number of concrete monosyllabic words of Anglo-Saxon
origin to describe objects and forces common to rural life.
A simple listing of the common nouns from the opening of "Fragment
I" will serve to illustrate this tendency: _love, son, hill,
deer, dogs, bow-string, wind, stream, rushes, mist, oak, friends_.
Such diction bears an obvious kinship to what was to become the
staple diction of the romantic lyric; for example, a similar listing
from "A Slumber Did My Spirit Seal" would be this: _slumber,
spirit, fears, thing, touch, years, motion, force, course, rocks,
stones, trees_.

The untamed power of Macpherson's wild natural settings is
also striking. Samuel H. Monk has made the point well:

"Ossian's strange exotic wildness and his obscure, terrible glimpses
of scenery were in essence something quite new.... Ossian's images were
far from "nature methodized." His imagination illumined fitfully a scene
of mountains and blasted heaths, as artificially wild as his heroines
were artificially sensitive; to modern readers they resemble too much
the stage-settings of melodrama. But in 1760, his descriptions carried
with them the thrill of the genuine and of naïvely archaic."

And Monk adds, "imperceptibly the Ossianic poems contributed
toward converting Britons, nay, Europeans, into enthusiastic admirers
of nature in her wilder moments."[14]

Ghosts are habitually present in the poems, and Macpherson
is able to present them convincingly because they are described
by a poet who treats them as though they were part of his and his
audience's habitual experience. The supernatural world is so
familiar, in fact, that it can be used to describe the natural; thus
Minvane in "Fragment VII" is called as fair "as the spirits of the
hill when at silent noon they glide along the heath." As Patricia
M. Spacks has observed, the supernatural seems to be a "genuine
part of the poetic texture"; and she adds that

"within this poetic context, the supernatural seems convincing
because believed in: it is part of the fabric of life for the
characters of the poem. Ghosts in the Ossianic poems, almost uniquely
in the mid-eighteenth century, seem genuinely to belong; to this
particular poetic conception the supernatural does not seem
extraneous."[15]

The _Fragments_ was also a cause and a reflection of the rising
appeal of the hero of sensibility, whose principal characteristic
was that he could feel more intensely than the mass of humanity.
The most common emotion that these acutely empathetic heroes
felt was grief, the emotion that permeates the _Fragments_ and the
rest of Macpherson's work. It was the exquisite sensibility of
Macpherson's heroes and heroines that the young Goethe was
struck by; Werther, an Ossianic hero in his own way, comments,

"You should see what a silly figure I cut when she
is mentioned in society! And then if I am even asked
how I like her--Like! I hate that word like death. What
sort of person must that be who likes Lotte, in whom all
senses, all emotions are not completely filled up by her!
Like! Recently someone asked me how I like Ossian!"[16]

That Macpherson chose to call his poems "fragments" is indicative
of another quality that made them unusual in their day.
The poems have a spontaneity that is suggested by the fact that
the poets seem to be creating their songs as the direct reflection
of an emotional experience. In contrast to the image of the poet
as the orderer, the craftsman, the poets of the _Fragments_ have a
kind of artlessness (to us a very studied one, to be sure) that gave
them an aura of sincerity and honesty. The poems are fragmentary
in the sense that they do not follow any orderly, rational plan but
seem to take the form that corresponds to the development of an
emotional experience. As Macpherson told Blair they are very
different from "modern, connected, and polished poetry."



V

The _Fragments_ proved an immediate success and Macpherson's
Edinburgh patrons moved swiftly to raise enough money to enable
the young Highlander to resign his position as tutor and to devote
himself to collecting and translating the Gaelic poetry still extant
in the Highlands. Blair recalled that he and Lord Elibank were instrumental
in convening a dinner meeting that was attended by "many of the first
persons of rank and taste in Edinburgh," including Robertson, Home, and
Fergusson.[17] Robert Chalmers acted as treasurer; among the forty odd
subscribers who contributed 60£, were James Boswell and David Hume.[18]
By the time of the second edition of the _Fragments_ (also in 1760),
Blair, or more likely Macpherson himself, could inform the public in the
"Advertisement" "that measures are now taken for making a full collection
of the remaining Scottish bards; in particular, for recovering and
translating the heroic poem mentioned in the preface."

Macpherson, a frugal man, included many of the "Fragments"
in his later work. Sometimes he introduced them into the notes as
being later than Ossian but in the same spirit; at other times he
introduced them as episodes in the longer narratives. With the exception
of Laing's edition, they are not set off, however, and anyone
who wishes to see what caused the initial Ossianic fervor
must consult the original volume.

When we have to remind ourselves that a work of art was revolutionary
in its day, we can be sure that we are dealing with something
closer to cultural artifact than to art, and it must be granted
that this is true of Macpherson's work; nevertheless, the fact that
Ossian aroused the interest of major men of letters for fifty years
is suggestive of his importance as an innovator. In a curious way,
Macpherson's achievement has been overshadowed by the fact that
many greater writers followed him and developed the artistic
direction that he was among the first to take.




NOTES TO THE INTRODUCTION


[Footnote 1: See Scott's letter to Anna Seward in J. G. Lockhart, _Memoirs of
    Sir Walter Scott_ (London, 1900), I, 410-15.]

[Footnote 2: _The Poems of Ossian_, ed. Malcolm Laing (Edinburgh, 1805), I, 441.]

[Footnote 3: See Home's letter to Mackenzie in the _Report of the Committee of the
    Highland Society of Scotland_ (Edinburgh, 1805), Appendix, pp. 68-69.]

[Footnote 4: Carlyle to Mackenzie, _ibid_., p. 66.]

[Footnote 5: Blair to Mackenzie, _ibid_., p. 57.]

[Footnote 6: _Ibid_., p. 58.]

[Footnote 7: Quoted from _The Poems of Ossian_ (London, 1807), I, 222.   After its
    initial separate publication, Blair's dissertation was regularly
    included with the collected poems.]

[Footnote 8: _Correspondence of Thomas Gray_, ed. Paget Toynbee and Leonard
    Whibley (Oxford, 1935), II, 679-80.]

[Footnote 9: _The Works of Lord Byron, Poetry_, ed. Ernest Hartley Coleridge
    (London, 1898), I, 183.]

[Footnote 10: "On Poetry in General," _The Complete Works of William Hazlitt_, ed.
     P. P. Howe (London, 1930), V, 18.]

[Footnote 11: Quoted in Henry Grey Graham, _Scottish Men of Letters in the
     Eighteenth Century_ (London, 1908), p. 240.]

[Footnote 12: _Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century_, ed. Alexander
     Allardyce (Edinburgh, 1888), I, 547.]

[Footnote 13: "The Influence of Ossian," _English_, VII (1948), 96.]

[Footnote 14: _The Sublime_ (Ann Arbor, 1960), p. 126.]

[Footnote 15: _The Insistence of Horror_ (Cambridge, Mass., 1962), pp. 86-87.]

[Footnote 16: _The Sufferings of Young Werther_, trans. Bayard Morgan (New York,
     1957), p. 51.]

[Footnote 17: _Report_, Appendix, p. 58.]

[Footnote 18: See Robert M. Schmitz, _Hugh Blair_ (New York, 1948), p. 48.]





FRAGMENTS OF ANCIENT POETRY

Collected in the Highlands of Scotland,

and

Translated from the Galic or Erse Language



   "Vos quoque qui fortes animas, belloque peremtas
   Laudibus in longum vates dimittitis aevuin,
   Plurima securi fudistis carmina _Bardi_."




LUCAN




PREFACE

The public may depend on the following fragments as genuine remains of
ancient Scottish poetry. The date of their composition cannot be exactly
ascertained. Tradition, in the country where they were written, refers
them to an æra of the most remote antiquity: and this tradition is
supported by the spirit and strain of the poems themselves; which abound
with those ideas, and paint those manners, that belong to the most early
state of society. The diction too, in the original, is very obsolete;
and differs widely from the style of such poems as have been written in
the same language two or three centuries ago. They were certainly
composed before the establishment of clanship in the northern part of
Scotland, which is itself very ancient; for had clans been then formed
and known, they must have made a considerable figure in the work of a
Highland Bard; whereas there is not the least mention of them in these
poems. It is remarkable that there are found in them no allusions to the
Christian religion or worship; indeed, few traces of religion of any kind.
One circumstance seems to prove them to be coeval with the very infancy
of Christianity in Scotland. In a fragment of the same poems, which the
translator has seen, a Culdee or Monk is represented as desirous to take
down in writing from the mouth of Oscian, who is the principal personage
in several of the following fragments, his warlike atchievements and
those of his family. But Oscian treats the monk and his religion with
disdain, telling him, that the deeds of such great men were subjects too
high to be recorded by him, or by any of his religion: A full proof that
Christianity was not as yet established in the country.

Though the poems now published appear as detached pieces in this
collection, there is ground to believe that most of them were originally
episodes of a greater work which related to the wars of Fingal.
Concerning this hero innumerable traditions remain, to this day, in the
Highlands of Scotland. The story of Oscian, his son, is so generally
known, that to describe one in whom the race of a great family ends, it
has passed into a proverb; "Oscian the last of the heroes."

There can be no doubt that these poems are to be ascribed to the Bards;
a race of men well known to have continued throughout many ages in
Ireland and the north of Scotland. Every chief or great man had in his
family a Bard or poet, whose office it was to record in verse, the
illustrious actions of that family. By the succession of these Bards, such
poems were handed down from race to race; some in manuscript, but more by
oral tradition. And tradition, in a country so free of intermixture with
foreigners, and among a people so strongly attached to the memory of their
ancestors, has preserved many of them in a great measure incorrupted to
this day.

They are not set to music, nor sung. The verification in the original is
simple; and to such as understand the language, very smooth and beautiful;
Rhyme is seldom used: but the cadence, and the length of the line varied,
so as to suit the sense. The translation is extremely literal. Even the
arrangement of the words in the original has been imitated; to which must
be imputed some inversions in the style, that otherwise would not have
been chosen.

Of the poetical merit of these fragments nothing shall here be said. Let
the public judge, and pronounce. It is believed, that, by a careful
inquiry, many more remains of ancient genius, no less valuable than those
now given to the world, might be found in the same country where these
have been collected. In particular there is reason to hope that one work
of considerable length, and which deserves to be styled an heroic poem,
might be recovered and translated, if encouragement were given to such an
undertaking. The subject is, an invasion of Ireland by Swarthan King of
Lochlyn; which is the name of Denmark in the Erse language. Cuchulaid,
the General or Chief of the Irish tribes, upon intelligence of the
invasion, assembles his forces. Councils are held; and battles fought.
But after several unsuccescful engagements, the Irish are forced to
submit. At length, Fingal King of Scotland, called in this poem, "The
Desert of the hills," arrives with his ships to assist Cuchulaid. He
expels the Danes from the country; and returns home victorious. This poem
is held to be of greater antiquity than any of the rest that are preserved.
And the author speaks of himself as present in the expedition of Fingal.
The three last poems in the collection are fragments which the translator
obtained of this epic poem; and though very imperfect, they were judged not
unworthy of being inserted. If the whole were recovered, it might serve to
throw confiderable light upon the Scottish and Irish antiquities.




FRAGMENT

   I

   SHILRIC, VINVELA.

   VINVELA

   My love is a son of the hill.
   He pursues the flying deer.
   His grey dogs are panting
   around him; his bow-string sounds in
   the wind. Whether by the fount of
   the rock, or by the stream of the
   mountain thou liest; when the rushes are
   nodding with the wind, and the mist
   is flying over thee, let me approach
   my love unperceived, and see him
   from the rock. Lovely I saw thee
   first by the aged oak; thou wert returning
   tall from the chace; the fairest
   among thy friends.

   SHILRIC.

   What voice is that I hear? that
   voice like the summer-wind.--I sit
   not by the nodding rushes; I hear not
   the fount of the rock. Afar, Vinvela,
   afar I go to the wars of Fingal. My
   dogs attend me no more. No more
   I tread the hill. No more from on
   high I see thee, fair-moving by the
   stream of the plain; bright as the
   bow of heaven; as the moon on the
   western wave.

   VINVELA.

   Then thou art gone, O Shilric!
   and I am alone on the hill. The
   deer are seen on the brow; void of
   fear they graze along. No more they
   dread the wind; no more the rustling
   tree. The hunter is far removed;
   he is in the field of graves. Strangers!
   sons of the waves! spare my
   lovely Shilric.

   SHILRIC.

   If fall I must in the field, raise high
   my grave, Vinvela. Grey stones, and
   heaped-up earth, shall mark me to future
   times. When the hunter shall sit by
   the mound, and produce his food at
   noon, "some warrior rests here," he
   will say; and my fame shall live in his
   praise. Remember me, Vinvela, when
   low on earth I lie!

   VINVELA.

   Yes!--I will remember thee--indeed
   my Shilric will fall. What shall I do,
   my love! when thou art gone for ever?
   Through these hills I will go at noon: O
   will go through the silent heath. There
   I will see where often thou sattest returning
   from the chace. Indeed, my Shilric
   will fall; but I will remember
   him.



   II

   I sit by the mossy fountain; on the
   top of the hill of winds. One tree is
   rustling above me. Dark waves roll
   over the heath. The lake is troubled
   below. The deer descend from the
   hill. No hunter at a distance is seen;
   no whistling cow-herd is nigh. It is
   mid-day: but all is silent. Sad are my
   thoughts as I sit alone. Didst thou
   but appear, O my love, a wanderer on
   the heath! thy hair floating on the
   wind behind thee; thy bosom heaving
   on the sight; thine eyes full of tears
   for thy friends, whom the mist of the
   hill had concealed! Thee I would comfort,
   my love, and bring thee to thy
   father's house.

   But is it she that there appears, like
   a beam of light on the heath? bright
   as the moon in autumn, as the sun in
   a summer-storm?--She speaks: but
   how weak her voice! like the breeze
   in the reeds of the pool. Hark!

   Returnest thou safe from the war?
   "Where are thy friends, my love? I
   heard of thy death on the hill; I heard
   and mourned thee, Shilric!"

   Yes, my fair, I return; but I alone
   of my race. Thou shalt see them no
   more: their graves I raised on the plain.
   But why art thou on the desert hill?
   why on the heath, alone?

   Alone I am, O Shilric! alone in the
   winter-house. With grief for thee I
   expired. Shilric, I am pale in the tomb.

   She fleets, she sails away; as grey
   mist before the wind!--and, wilt thou
   not stay, my love? Stay and behold
   my tears? fair thou appearest, my love!
   fair thou wast, when alive!

   By the mossy fountain I will sit; on
   the top of the hill of winds. When
   mid-day is silent around, converse, O
   my love, with me! come on the wings
   of the gale! on the blast of the mountain,
   come! Let me hear thy voice, as
   thou passest, when mid-day is silent around.



   III

   Evening is grey on the hills. The
   north wind resounds through the
   woods. White clouds rise on the sky: the
   trembling snow descends. The river howls
   afar, along its winding course. Sad,
   by a hollow rock, the grey-hair'd Carryl
   sat. Dry fern waves over his head; his
   seat is in an aged birch. Clear to the
   roaring winds he lifts his voice of woe.

   Tossed on the wavy ocean is He,
   the hope of the isles; Malcolm, the
   support of the poor; foe to the proud
   in arms! Why hast thou left us behind?
   why live we to mourn thy fate? We
   might have heard, with thee, the voice
   of the deep; have seen the oozy rock.

   Sad on the sea-beat shore thy spouse
   looketh for thy return. The time of
   thy promise is come; the night is gathering
   around. But no white sail is
   on the sea; no voice is heard except
   the blustering winds. Low is the soul
   of the war! Wet are the locks of youth!
   By the foot of some rock thou liest;
   washed by the waves as they come.
   Why, ye winds, did ye bear him on
   the desert rock? Why, ye waves, did
   ye roll over him?

   But, Oh! what voice is that?
   Who rides on that meteor of fire! Green
   are his airy limbs. It is he! it is the
   ghost of Malcolm!--Rest, lovely soul,
   rest on the rock; and let me hear thy
   voice!--He is gone, like a dream of
   the night. I see him through the trees.
   Daughter of Reynold! he is gone.
   Thy spouse shall return no more. No
   more shall his hounds come from the
   hill, forerunners of their master. No
   more from the distant rock shall his
   voice greet thine ear. Silent is he in
   the deep, unhappy daughter of Reynold!

   I will sit by the stream of the plain.
   Ye rocks! hang over my head. Hear
   my voice, ye trees! as ye bend on the
   shaggy hill. My voice shall preserve
   the praise of him, the hope of the
   isles.



   IV

   CONNAL,  CRIMORA,

   CRIMORA.

   Who cometh from the hill, like
   a cloud tinged with the beam
   of the west? Whose voice is that, loud
   as the wind, but pleasant as the harp of
   Carryl? It is my love in the light of
   steel; but sad is his darkened brow.
   Live the mighty race of Fingal? or
   what disturbs my Connal?

   CONNAL.

   They live. I saw them return from
   the chace, like a stream of light. The
   sun was on their shields: In a line they
   descended the hill. Loud is the voice of
   the youth; the war, my love, is near.
   To-morrow the enormous Dargo comes
   to try the force of our race. The race of
   Fingal he defies; the race of battle and
   wounds.

   CRIMORA.
   Connal, I saw his sails like grey mist
   on the sable wave. They came to land.
   Connnal, many are the warriors of
   Dargo!

   CONNAL.

   Bring me thy father's shield; the iron
   shield of Rinval; that shield like the
   full moon when it is darkened in the
   sky.

   CRIMORA.

   That shield I bring, O Connal; but
   it did not defend my father. By the
   spear of Gauror he fell. Thou mayst
   fall, O Connal!

   CONNAL.

   Fall indeed I may: But raise my
   tomb, Crimora. Some stones, a mound
   of earth, shall keep my memory.
   Though fair thou art, my love, as the
   light; more pleasant than the gale of
   the hill; yet I will not stay. Raise my
   tomb, Crimora.

   CRIMORA,

   Then give me those arms of light;
   that sword, and that spear of steel. I
   shall meet Dargo with thee, and aid my
   lovely Connal. Farewell, ye rocks of
   Ardven! ye deer! and ye streams of
   the hill!--We shall return no more.
   Our tombs are distant far.



   V

   Autumn is dark on the mountains;
   grey mist rests on the hills. The
   whirlwind is heard on the heath. Dark
   rolls the river through the narrow plain.
   A tree stands alone on the hill, and
   marks the grave of Connal. The leaves
   whirl round with the wind, and strew
   the grave of the dead. At times are
   seen here the ghosts of the deceased,
   when the musing hunter alone stalks
   slowly over the heath.

   Who can reach the source of thy
   race, O Connal? and who recount thy
   Fathers? Thy family grew like an oak
   on the mountain, which meeteth the
   wind with its lofty head. But now it
   is torn from the earth. Who shall supply
   the place of Connal?

   Here was the din of arms; and
   here the groans of the dying. Mournful
   are the wars of Fingal! O Connal!
   it was here thou didst fall. Thine arm
   was like a storm; thy sword, a beam
   of the sky; thy height, a rock on the
   plain; thine eyes, a furnace of fire.
   Louder than a storm was thy voice,
   when thou confoundedst the field. Warriors
   fell by thy sword, as the thistle by
   the staff of a boy.

   Dargo the mighty came on, like a
   cloud of thunder. His brows were contracted
   and dark. His eyes like two
   caves in a rock. Bright rose their
   swords on each side; dire was the clang
   of their steel.

   The daughter of Rinval was near;
   Crimora, bright in the armour of man;
   her hair loose behind, her bow in her
   hand. She followed the youth to the
   war, Connal her much beloved. She
   drew the string on Dargo; but erring
   pierced her Connal. He falls like an
   oak on the plain; like a rock from the
   shaggy hill. What shall she do, hapless
   maid!--He bleeds; her Connal dies.
   All the night long she cries, and all the
   day, O Connal, my love, and my
   friend! With grief the sad mourner
   died.

   Earth here incloseth the loveliest
   pair on the hill. The grass grows between
   the stones of their tomb; I sit in
   the mournful shade. The wind sighs
   through the grass; and their memory
   rushes on my mind. Undisturbed you
   now sleep together; in the tomb of the
   mountain you rest alone.



   VI

   Son of the noble Fingal, Oscian,
   Prince of men! what tears run down
   the cheeks of age? what shades thy
   mighty soul?

   Memory, son of Alpin, memory
   wounds the aged. Of former times are
   my thoughts; my thoughts are of the
   noble Fingal. The race of the king return
   into my mind, and wound me with
   remembrance.

   One day, returned from the sport of
   the mountains, from pursuing the sons
   of the hill, we covered this heath with
   our youth. Fingal the mighty was here,
   and Oscur, my son, great in war. Fair
   on our sight from the sea, at once, a
   virgin came. Her breast was like the
   snow of one night. Her cheek like the
   bud of the rose. Mild was her blue
   rolling eye: but sorrow was big in her
   heart.

   Fingal renowned in war! she cries,
   sons of the king, preserve me! Speak secure,
   replies the king, daughter of beauty,
   speak: our ear is open to all: our
   swords redress the injured. I fly from
   Ullin, she cries, from Ullin famous in
   war. I fly from the embrace of him
   who would debase my blood. Cremor,
   the friend of men, was my father; Cremor
   the Prince of Inverne.

   Fingal's younger sons arose; Carryl
   expert in the bow; Fillan beloved of
   the fair; and Fergus first in the race.
   --Who from the farthest Lochlyn?
   who to the seas of Molochasquir? who
   dares hurt the maid whom the sons of
   Fingal guard? Daughter of beauty, rest
   secure; rest in peace, thou fairest of women.

   Far in the blue distance of the deep,
   some spot appeared like the back of the
   ridge-wave. But soon the ship increased
   on our sight. The hand of Ullin drew
   her to land. The mountains trembled
   as he moved. The hills shook at his
   steps. Dire rattled his armour around
   him. Death and destruction were in his
   eyes. His stature like the roe of Morven.
   He moved in the lightning of
   steel.

   Our warriors fell before him,
   like the field before the reapers. Fingal's
   three sons he bound. He plunged
   his sword into the fair-one's breast.
   She fell as a wreath of snow before the
   sun in spring. Her bosom heaved in
   death; her soul came forth in blood.
   Oscur my son came down; the
   mighty in battle descended. His armour
   rattled as thunder; and the lightning of
   his eyes was terrible. There, was the
   clashing of swords; there, was the voice
   of steel. They struck and they thrust;
   they digged for death with their swords.
   But death was distant far, and delayed
   to come. The sun began to decline;
   and the cow-herd thought of home.
   Then Oscur's keen steel found the heart
   of Ullin. He fell like a mountain-oak
   covered over with glittering frost: He
   shone like a rock on the plain.--Here
   the daughter of beauty lieth; and
   here the bravest of men. Here one
   day ended the fair and the valiant.
   Here rest the pursuer and the pursued.

   Son of Alpin! the woes of the aged
   are many: their tears are for the past.
   This raised my sorrow, warriour; memory
   awaked my grief. Oscur my
   son was brave; but Oscur is now no
   more. Thou hast heard my grief, O
   son of Alpin; forgive the tears of the
   aged.



   VII

   Why openest thou afresh the spring of
   my grief, O son of Alpin, inquiring
   how Oscur fell? My eyes are blind with
   tears; but memory beams on my heart.
   How can I relate the mournful death of
   the head of the people! Prince of the
   warriours, Oscur my son, shall I see thee
   no more!

   He fell as the moon in a storm; as
   the sun from the midst of his course,
   when clouds rise from the waste of the
   waves, when the blackness of the storm
   inwraps the rocks of Ardannider. I, like
   an ancient oak on Morven, I moulder
   alone in my place. The blast hath lopped
   my branches away; and I tremble
   at the wings of the north. Prince of
   the warriors, Oscur my son! shall I see
   thee no more!

   DERMID

   DERMID and Oscur were one: They
   reaped the battle together. Their
   friendship was strong as their steel; and
   death walked between them to the field.
   They came on the foe like two rocks
   falling from the brows of Ardven. Their
   swords were stained with the blood of
   the valiant: warriours fainted at their
   names. Who was a match for Oscur,
   but Dermid? and who for Dermid, but
   Oscur?

   THEY killed mighty Dargo in the
   field; Dargo before invincible. His
   daughter was fair as the morn; mild
   as the beam of night. Her eyes, like
   two stars in a shower: her breath, the
   gale of spring: her breasts, as the
   new fallen snow floating on the moving heath.
   The warriours saw her, and loved; their
   souls were fixed on the maid. Each
   loved her, as his fame; each must
   possess her or die. But her soul was fixed
   on Oscur; my son was the youth of
   her love. She forgot the blood of her
   father; and loved the hand that slew
   him.

   Son of Oscian, said Dermid, I love;
   O Oscur, I love this maid. But her
   soul cleaveth unto thee; and nothing
   can heal Dermid. Here, pierce this
   bosom, Oscur; relieve me, my friend,
   with thy sword.

   My sword, son of Morny, shall never
   be stained with the blood of Dermid.

   Who then is worthy to slay me, O
   Oscur son of Oscian? Let not my life
   pass away unknown. Let none but Oscur
   slay me. Send me with honour to
   the grave, and let my death be renowned.
   Dermid, make use of thy sword;
   son of Moray, wield thy steel. Would
   that I fell with thee! that my death
   came from the hand of Dermid!

   They fought by the brook of the
   mountain; by the streams of Branno.
   Blood tinged the silvery stream, and
   crudled round the mossy stones. Dermid
   the graceful fell; fell, and smiled in
   death.

   And fallest thou, son of Morny;
   fallest, thou by Oscur's hand! Dermid
   invincible in war, thus do I see thee fall!
   --He went, and returned to the maid
   whom he loved; returned, but she perceived
   his grief.

   Why that gloom, son of Oscian?
   what shades thy mighty soul?

   Though once renowned for the bow,
   O maid, I have lost my fame. Fixed on
   a tree by the brook of the hill, is the
   shield of Gormur the brave, whom in
   battle I slew. I have wasted the day
   in vain, nor could my arrow pierce it.

   Let me try, son Oscian, the skill
   of Dargo's daughter. My hands were
   taught the bow: my father delighted in
   my skill.

   She went. He stood behind the
   shield. Her arrow flew and pierced his
   breast[A].

   [Footnote A: Nothing was held by the ancient Highlanders more essential
   to their glory, than to die by the hand of some person worthy or renowned.
   This was the occasion of Oscur's contriving to be slain by his mistress,
   now that he was weary of life. In those early times suicide was utterly
   unknown among that people, and no traces of it are found in the old
   poetry. Whence the translator suspects the account that follows of the
   daughter of Dargo killing herself, to be the interpolation of some later
   Bard.]

   Blessed be that hand of snow; and
   blessed thy bow of yew! I fall resolved
   on death: and who but the daughter of
   Dargo was worthy to slay me? Lay me
   in the earth, my fair-one; lay me by
   the side of Dermid.

   Oscur! I have the blood, the soul
   of the mighty Dargo. Well pleased I
   can meet death. My sorrow I can end
   thus.--She pierced her white bosom
   with steel. She fell; she trembled; and
   died.

   By the brook of the hill their graves
   are laid; a birch's unequal shade covers
   their tomb. Often on their green earthen
   tombs the branchy sons of the mountain
   feed, when mid-day is all in flames,
   and silence is over all the hills.



   VIII

   By the side of a rock on the hill, beneath
   the aged trees, old Oscian
   sat on the moss; the last of the race of
   Fingal. Sightless are his aged eyes;
   his beard is waving in the wind. Dull
   through the leafless trees he heard the
   voice of the north. Sorrow revived in
   his soul: he began and lamented the
   dead.

   How hast thou fallen like an oak,
   with all thy branches round thee! Where
   is Fingal the King? where is Oscur my
   son? where are all my race? Alas! in
   the earth they lie. I feel their tombs
   with my hands. I hear the river below
   murmuring hoarsely over the stones.
   What dost thou, O river, to me? Thou
   bringest back the memory of the past.

   The race of Fingal stood on thy
   banks, like a wood in a fertile soil.
   Keen were their spears of steel. Hardy
   was he who dared to encounter their
   rage. Fillan the great was there. Thou
   Oscur wert there, my son! Fingal himself
   was there, strong in the grey locks
   of years. Full rose his sinewy limbs;
   and wide his shoulders spread. The
   unhappy met with his arm, when the
   pride of his wrath arose.

   The son of Morny came; Gaul, the
   tallest of men. He stood on the hill like
   an oak; his voice was like the streams of
   the hill. Why reigneth alone, he cries,
   the son of the mighty Corval? Fingal is
   not strong to save: he is no support for
   the people. I am strong as a storm in
   the ocean; as a whirlwind on the hill.
   Yield, son of Corval; Fingal, yield to
   me.

   Oscur stood forth to meet him;
   my son would meet the foe. But Fingal
   came in his strength, and smiled at
   the vaunter's boast. They threw their
   arms round each other; they struggled
   on the plain. The earth is ploughed with
   their heels. Their bones crack as the boat
   on the ocean, when it leaps from wave to
   wave. Long did they toil; with night,
   they fell on the sounding plain; as two
   oaks, with their branches mingled, fall
   crashing from the hill. The tall son
   of Morny is bound; the aged overcame.

   Fair with her locks of gold, her
   smooth neck, and her breasts of snow;
   fair, as the spirits of the hill when at
   silent noon they glide along the heath;
   fair, as the rainbow of heaven; came
   Minvane the maid. Fingal! She softly
   saith, loose me my brother Gaul.
   Loose me the hope of my race, the terror
   of all but Fingal. Can I, replies the
   King, can I deny the lovely daughter
   of the hill? take thy brother, O Minvane,
   thou fairer than the snow of the
   north!

   Such, Fingal! were thy words; but
   thy words I hear no more. Sightless
   I sit by thy tomb. I hear the wind in
   the wood; but no more I hear my
   friends. The cry of the hunter is over.
   The voice of war is ceased.



   IX

   Thou askest, fair daughter of the
   isles! whose memory is preserved
   in these tombs? The memory of Ronnan
   the bold, and Connan the chief of
   men; and of her, the fairest of maids,
   Rivine the lovely and the good. The
   wing of time is laden with care. Every
   moment hath woes of its own. Why
   seek we our grief from afar? or give our
   tears to those of other times? But thou
   commanded, and I obey, O fair daughter
   of the isles!

   Conar was mighty in war. Caul
   was the friend of strangers. His gates
   were open to all; midnight darkened
   not on his barred door. Both lived upon
   the sons of the mountains. Their bow
   was the support of the poor.

   Connan was the image of Conar's
   soul. Caul was renewed in Ronnan his
   son. Rivine the daughter of Conar was
   the love of Ronnan; her brother Connan
   was his friend. She was fair as the
   harvest-moon setting in the seas of
   Molochasquir. Her soul was settled on
   Ronnan; the youth was the dream of her
   nights.

   Rivine, my love! says Ronnan, I go
   to my king in Norway[A]. A year and
   a day shall bring me back. Wilt thou
   be true to Ronnan?

   [Footnote A: Supposed to be Fergus II. This fragment is reckoned not
   altogether so ancient as most of the rest.]

   Ronnan! a year and a day I will
   spend in sorrow. Ronnan, behave like
   a man, and my soul shall exult in thy
   valour. Connan my friend, says Ronnan,
   wilt thou preserve Rivine thy sister?
   Durstan is in love with the maid;
   and soon shall the sea bring the stranger
   to our coast.

   Ronnan, I will defend: Do thou
   securely go.--He went. He returned
   on his day. But Durstan returned
   before him.

   Give me thy daughter, Conar, says
   Durstan; or fear and feel my power.

   He who dares attempt my sister, says
   Connan, must meet this edge of steel.
   Unerring in battle is my arm: my
   sword, as the lightning of heaven.

   Ronnan the warriour came; and
   much he threatened Durstan.

   But, saith Euran the servant of
   gold, Ronnan! by the gate of the north
   shall Durstan this night carry thy fair-one
   away. Accursed, answers Ronnan, be this arm if death meet him not
   there.

   Connan! saith Euran, this night
   shall the stranger carry thy sister away.
   My sword shall meet him, replies Connan,
   and he shall lie low on earth.

   The friends met by night, and they
   fought. Blood and sweat ran down
   their limbs as water on the mossy rock.
   Connan falls; and cries, O Durstan,
   be favourable to Rivine!--And is it my
   friend, cries Ronnan, I have slain? O
   Connan! I knew thee not.

   He went, and he fought with Durstan.
   Day began to rise on the combat,
   when fainting they fell, and expired.
   Rivine came out with the morn;
   and--O what detains my Ronnan!
   --She saw him lying pale in his blood;
   and her brother lying pale by his side.

   What could she say: what could she
   do? her complaints were many and vain.
   She opened this grave for the warriours;
   and fell into it herself, before it
   was closed; like the sun snatched away
   in a storm.

   Thou hast heard this tale of grief,
   O fair daughter of the isles! Rivine was
   fair as thyself: shed on her grave a
   tear.



   X

   It is night; and I am alone, forlorn
   on the hill of storms. The wind is
   heard in the mountain. The torrent
   shrieks down the rock. No hut receives
   me from the rain; forlorn on the hill of
   winds.

   Rise, moon! from behind thy
   clouds; stars of the night, appear!
   Lead me, some light, to the place where
   my love rests from the toil of the chase!
   his bow near him, unstrung; his dogs
   panting around him. But here I must
   sit alone, by the rock of the mossy
   stream. The stream and the wind
   roar; nor can I hear the voice of my
   love.

   Why delayeth my Shalgar, why the
   son of the hill, his promise? Here is
   the rock; and the tree; and here the
   roaring stream. Thou promisedst with
   night to be here. Ah! whither is my
   Shalgar gone? With thee I would fly
   my father; with thee, my brother of
   pride. Our race have long been foes;
   but we are not foes, O Shalgar!

   Cease a little while, O wind! stream,
   be thou silent a while! let my voice be
   heard over the heath; let my wanderer
   hear me. Shalgar! it is I who call. Here
   is the tree, and the rock. Shalgar, my
   love! I am here. Why delayest thou
   thy coming? Alas! no answer.

   Lo! the moon appeareth. The
   flood is bright in the vale. The rocks
   are grey on the face of the hill. But
   I see him not on the brow; his dogs
   before him tell not that he is coming.
   Here I must sit alone.

   But who are these that lie beyond
   me on the heath? Are they my love
   and my brother?--Speak to me, O my
   friends! they answer not. My soul is
   tormented with fears.--Ah! they are
   dead. Their swords are red from the
   fight. O my brother! my brother!
   why hast thou slain my Shalgar? why,
   O Shalgar! hast thou slain my brother?
   Dear were ye both to me! speak to me;
   hear my voice, sons of my love! But
   alas! they are silent; silent for ever!
   Cold are their breast of clay!

   Oh! from the rock of the hill;
   from the top of the mountain of winds,
   speak ye ghosts of the dead! speak,
   and I will not be afraid.--Whither
   are ye gone to rest? In what cave of
   the hill shall I find you?

   I sit in my grief. I wait for morning
   in my tears. Rear the tomb, ye
   friends of the dead; but close it not
   till I come. My life flieth away like a
   dream: why should I stay behind?
   Here shall I rest with my friends by the
   stream of the founding rock. When
   night comes on the hill: when the wind
   is up on the heath; my ghost shall stand
   in the wind, and mourn the death of
   my friends. The hunter shall hear
   from his booth. He shall fear, but
   love my voice. For sweet shall my voice
   be for my friends; for pleasant were
   they both to me.



   XI

   Sad! I am sad indeed: nor small my
   cause of woe!--Kirmor, thou hast
   lost no son; thou hast lost no daughter
   of beauty. Connar the valiant lives;
   and Annir the fairest of maids. The
   boughs of thy family flourish, O Kirmor!
   but Armyn is the last of his
   race.

   Rise, winds of autumn, rise; blow
   upon the dark heath! streams of the
   mountains, roar! howl, ye tempests,
   in the trees! walk through broken
   clouds, O moon! show by intervals thy
   pale face! bring to my mind that sad
   night, when all my children fell; when
   Arindel the mighty fell; when Daura
   the lovely died.

   Daura, my daughter! thou wert
   fair; fair as the moon on the hills of
   Jura; white as the driven snow; sweet as
   the breathing gale. Armor renowned in
   war came, and fought Daura's love; he
   was not long denied; fair was the hope
   of their friends.

   Earch son of Odgal repined; for
   his brother was slain by Armor. He
   came disguised like a son of the sea:
   fair was his skiff on the wave; white
   his locks of age; calm his serious brow.
   Fairest of women, he said, lovely daughter
   of Armyn! a rock not distant in
   the sea, bears a tree on its side; red
   shines the fruit afar. There Armor
   waiteth for Daura. I came to fetch
   his love. Come, fair daughter of Armyn!

   She went; and she called on Armor.
   Nought answered, but the son of the
   rock. Armor, my love! my love!
   why tormentest thou me with fear?
   come, graceful son of Arduart, come;
   it is Daura who calleth thee!--Earch
   the traitor fled laughing to the land.
   She lifted up her voice, and cried for
   her brother and her father. Arindel!
   Armyn! none to relieve your Daura?

   Her voice came over the sea. Arindel
   my son descended from the hill;
   rough in the spoils of the chace. His
   arrows rattled by his side; his bow was
   in his hand; five grey dogs attended
   his steps. He saw fierce Earch on the
   shore; he seized and bound him to an
   oak. Thick fly the thongs of the hide
   around his limbs; he loads the wind
   with his groans.

   Arindel ascends the surgy deep in
   his boat, to bring Daura to the land.
   Armor came in his wrath, and let fly
   the grey-feathered shaft. It sung; it
   sunk in thy heart, O Arindel my son!
   for Earch the traitor thou diedst. What
   is thy grief, O Daura, when round
   thy feet is poured thy brother's blood!

   The boat is broken in twain by the
   waves. Armor plunges into the sea, to
   rescue his Daura or die. Sudden a blast
   from the hill comes over the waves.
   He sunk, and he rose no more.

   Alone, on the sea-beat rock, my
   daughter was heard to complain. Frequent
   and loud were her cries; nor
   could her father relieve her. All
   night I stood on the shore. All night I
   heard her cries. Loud was the wind;
   and the rain beat hard on the side of the
   mountain. Before morning appeared,
   her voice was weak. It died away, like
   the evening-breeze among the grass of
   the rocks. Spent with grief she expired.
   O lay me soon by her side.

   When the storms of the mountain
   come; when the north lifts the waves
   on high; I sit by the sounding shore,
   and look on the fatal rock. Often by
   the setting moon I see the ghosts of
   my children. Indistinct, they walk in
   mournful conference together. Will
   none of you speak to me?--But they
   do not regard their father.



   XII

   RYNO, ALPIN.

   RYNO

   The wind and the rain are over:
   calm is the noon of day. The
   clouds are divided in heaven. Over
   the green hills flies the inconstant sun.
   Red through the stony vale comes
   down the stream of the hill. Sweet are
   thy murmurs, O stream! but more
   sweet is the voice I hear. It is the voice
   of Alpin the son of the song, mourning
   for the dead. Bent is his head of age,
   and red his tearful eye. Alpin, thou
   son of the song, why alone on the silent
   hill? why complainest thou, as a
   blast in the wood; as a wave on the
   lonely shore?

   ALPIN.

   My tears, O Ryno! are for the dead;
   my voice, for the inhabitants of the
   grave. Tall thou art on the hill; fair
   among the sons of the plain. But thou
   shalt fall like Morar; and the mourner
   shalt sit on thy tomb. The hills shall
   know thee no more; thy bow shall lie in
   the hall, unstrung.

   Thou wert swift, O Morar! as a
   doe on the hill; terrible as a meteor of
   fire. Thy wrath was as the storm of
   December. Thy sword in battle, as
   lightning in the field. Thy voice was
   like a stream after rain; like thunder
   on distant hills. Many fell by thy
   arm; they were consumed in the flames
   of thy wrath.

   But when thou returnedst from war,
   how peaceful was thy brow! Thy face
   was like the sun after rain; like the
   moon in the silence of night; calm as
   the breast of the lake when the loud
   wind is laid.

   Narrow is thy dwelling now; dark
   the place of thine abode. With three
   steps I compass thy grave, O thou who
   wast so great before! Four stones with
   their heads of moss are the only memorial
   of thee. A tree with scarce a leaf,
   long grass which whistles in the wind,
   mark to the hunter's eye the grave of
   the mighty Morar. Morar! thou art
   low indeed. Thou hast no mother to
   mourn thee; no maid with her tears of
   love. Dead is she that brought thee
   forth. Fallen is the daughter of Morglan.

   Who on his staff is this? who is this,
   whose head is white with age, whose
   eyes are red with tears, who quakes
   at every step?--It is thy father, O
   Morar! the father of none but thee.
   He heard of thy fame in battle; he heard
   of foes dispersed. He heard of Morar's
   fame; why did he not hear of his
   wound? Weep, thou father of Morar!
   weep; but thy son heareth thee not.
   Deep is the sleep of the dead; low their
   pillow of dust. No more shall he hear
   thy voice; no more shall he awake at
   thy call.  When shall it be morn in the
   grave, to bid the slumberer awake?

   Farewell, thou bravest of men!
   thou conqueror in the field! but the field
   shall see thee no more; nor the dark
   wood be lightened with the splendor of
   thy steel. Thou hast left no son.
   But the song shall preserve thy name.
   Future times shall hear of thee; they
   shall hear of the fallen Morar.



   XIII

   [Footnote: This is the opening of the epic poem mentioned in the preface.
   The two following fragments are parts of some episodes of the same work.]

   Cuchlaid sat by the wall; by the
   tree of the rustling leaf.

   [Footnote: The aspen or poplar tree]

   His spear leaned against the mossy rock.
   His shield lay by him on the grass.
   Whilst he thought on the mighty Carbre
   whom he slew in battle, the scout of
   the ocean came, Moran the son of Fithil.

   Rise, Cuchulaid, rise! I see the ships
   of Garve. Many are the foe, Cuchulaid;
   many the sons of Lochlyn.

   Moran! thou ever tremblest; thy
   fears increase the foe. They are the
   ships of the Desert of hills arrived to assist
   Cuchulaid.

   I saw their chief, says Moran, tall as
   a rock of ice. His spear is like that fir;
   his shield like the rising moon. He sat
   upon a rock on the shore, as a grey
   cloud upon the hill. Many, mighty
   man! I said, many are our heroes;
   Garve, well art thou named,
   many are the sons of our king.

   [Footnote: Garve signifies a man of great size.]

   He answered like a wave on the
   rock; who is like me here? The valiant
   live not with me; they go to the
   earth from my hand. The king of the
   Desert of hills alone can fight with
   Garve. Once we wrestled on the hill.
   Our heels overturned the wood. Rocks
   fell from their place, and rivulets changed
   their course. Three days we strove
   together; heroes stood at a distance,
   and feared. On the fourth, the King
   saith that I fell; but Garve saith, he
   stood. Let Cuchulaid yield to him that
   is strong as a storm.

   No. I will never yield to man.
   Cuchulaid will conquer or die. Go,
   Moran, take my spear; strike the shield
   of Caithbait which hangs before the
   gate. It never rings in peace. My heroes
   shall hear on the hill,--



   XIV

   DUCHOMMAR, MORNA.

   DUCHOMMAR.

   [Footnote: The signification of the names in this fragment are;
   Dubhchomar, a black well-shaped man. Muirne or Morna, a woman beloved
   by all. Cormac-cairbre, an unequalled and rough warriour. Cromleach,
   a crooked hill. Mugruch, a surly gloomy man. Tarman, thunder. Moinie,
   soft in temper and person.]

   Morna, thou fairest of women,
   daughter of Cormac-Carbre!
   why in the circle of stones, in the cave
   of the rock, alone? The stream murmureth
   hoarsely. The blast groaneth
   in the aged tree. The lake is troubled
   before thee. Dark are the clouds of
   the sky. But thou art like snow on
   the heath. Thy hair like a thin cloud
   of gold on the top of Cromleach. Thy
   breasts like two smooth rocks on the hill
   which is seen from the stream of Brannuin.
   Thy arms, as two white pillars
   in the hall of Fingal.

   MORNA.

   Whence the son of Mugruch, Duchommar
   the most gloomy of men? Dark
   are thy brows of terror. Red thy rolling
   eyes. Does Garve appear on the
   sea? What of the foe, Duchommar?

   DUCHOMMAR.

   From the hill I return, O Morna,
   from the hill of the flying deer. Three
   have I slain with my bow; three with
   my panting dogs. Daughter of Cormac-Carbre,
   I love thee as my soul. I
   have slain a deer for thee. High was
   his branchy head; and fleet his feet of
   wind.

   MORNA.

   Gloomy son of Mugruch, Duchommar!
   I love thee not: hard is thy heart
   of rock; dark thy terrible brow. But
   Cadmor the son of Tarman, thou art
   the love of Morna! thou art like a sunbeam
   on the hill, in the day of the
   gloomy storm. Sawest thou the son of
   Tarman, lovely on the hill of the chace?
   Here the daughter of Cormac-Carbre
   waiteth the coming of Cadmor.

   DUCHOMMAR.

   And long shall Morna wait. His
   blood is on my sword. I met him by
   the mossy stone, by the oak of the noisy
   stream. He fought; but I slew him;
   his blood is on my sword. High on
   the hill I will raise his tomb, daughter
   of Cormac-Carbre. But love thou the
   son of Mugruch; his arm is strong as a
   storm.

   MORNA.

   And is the son of Tarman fallen;
   the youth with the breast of snow! the
   first in the chase of the hill; the foe
   of the sons of the ocean!--Duchommar,
   thou art gloomy indeed; cruel is
   thy arm to me.--But give me that
   sword, son of Mugruch; I love the
   blood of Cadmor.

   [He gives her the sword, with which she instantly stabs him.]

   DUCHOMMAR.

   Daughter of Cormac-Carbre, thou
   hast pierced Duchommar! the sword is
   cold in my breast; thou hast killed the
   son of Mugruch. Give me to Moinic
   the maid; for much she loved Duchommar.
   My tomb she will raise on the
   hill; the hunter shall see it, and praise
   me.--But draw the sword from my
   side, Morna; I feel it cold.--

   [Upon her coming near him, he stabs her. As she fell, she plucked a stone
   from the side of the cave, and placed it betwixt them, that his blood
   might not be mingled with hers.]



   XV

   [1]Where is Gealchossa my love, the
   daughter of Tuathal-Teachvar?
   I left her in the hall of the plain, when I
   fought with the hairy Ulfadha. Return
   soon, she said, O Lamderg! for
   here I wait in sorrow. Her white breast
   rose with sighs; her cheek was wet
   with tears. But she cometh not to meet
   Lamderg; or sooth his soul after battle.
   Silent is the hall of joy; I hear not
   the voice of the singer. Brann does
   not shake his chains at the gate, glad
   at the coming of his master. Where
   is Gealchossa my love, the daughter of
   Tuathal-Teachvar?

   [Footnote: The signification of the names in this fragment are;
   Gealchossack, white-legged. Tuathal-Teachtmhar, the surly, but fortunate
   man. Lambhdearg, bloodyhand. Ulfadba, long beard. Fichios, the conqueror
   of men.]

   Lamderg! says Firchios son of Aydon,
   Gealchossa may be on the hill;
   she and her chosen maids pursuing the
   flying deer.

   Firchios! no noise I hear. No
   sound in the wood of the hill. No
   deer fly in my sight; no panting dog
   pursueth. I see not Gealchossa my
   love; fair as the full moon setting on
   the hills of Cromleach. Go, Firchios!
   go to Allad, the grey-haired son of
   the rock. He liveth in the circle of
   stones; he may tell of Gealchossa.

   [Footnote: Allad is plainly a Druid consulted on this occasion.]

   Allad! saith Firchios, thou who
   dwellest in the rock; thou who tremblest
   alone; what saw thine eyes of
   age?

   I saw, answered Allad the old, Ullin the son of Carbre: He came like a
   cloud from the hill; he hummed a surly
   song as he came, like a storm in
   leafless wood. He entered the hall of
   the plain. Lamderg, he cried, most
   dreadful of men! fight, or yield to Ullin.
   Lamderg, replied Gealchoffa,
   Lamderg is not here: he fights the
   hairy Ulfadha; mighty man, he is not
   here. But Lamderg never yields; he
   will fight the son of Carbre. Lovely art
   thou, O daughter of Tuathal-Teachvar!
   said Ullin. I carry thee to the
   house of Carbre; the valiant shall have
   Gealchossa. Three days from the top
   of Cromleach will I call Lamderg to
   fight. The fourth, you belong to Ullin,
   if Lamderg die, or fly my sword.

   Allad! peace to thy dreams!--found
   the horn, Firchios!--Ullin may
   hear, and meet me on the top of Cromleach.

   Lamderg rushed on like a storm.
   On his spear he leaped over rivers. Few
   were his strides up the hill. The rocks
   fly back from his heels; loud crashing
   they bound to the plain. His armour,
   his buckler rung. He hummed a surly
   song, like the noise of the falling
   stream. Dark as a cloud he stood above;
   his arms, like meteors, shone.
   From the summit of the hill, he rolled
   a rock. Ullin heard in the hall of
   Carbre.--
TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE


I: ABOUT THIS TRANSLATION

It was with considerable reluctance that I abandoned in favour of the
present undertaking what had long been a favourite project: that of a new
edition of Shelton's "Don Quixote," which has now become a somewhat
scarce book. There are some--and I confess myself to be one--for whom
Shelton's racy old version, with all its defects, has a charm that no
modern translation, however skilful or correct, could possess. Shelton
had the inestimable advantage of belonging to the same generation as
Cervantes; "Don Quixote" had to him a vitality that only a contemporary
could feel; it cost him no dramatic effort to see things as Cervantes saw
them; there is no anachronism in his language; he put the Spanish of
Cervantes into the English of Shakespeare. Shakespeare himself most
likely knew the book; he may have carried it home with him in his
saddle-bags to Stratford on one of his last journeys, and under the
mulberry tree at New Place joined hands with a kindred genius in its
pages.

But it was soon made plain to me that to hope for even a moderate
popularity for Shelton was vain. His fine old crusted English would, no
doubt, be relished by a minority, but it would be only by a minority. His
warmest admirers must admit that he is not a satisfactory representative
of Cervantes. His translation of the First Part was very hastily made and
was never revised by him. It has all the freshness and vigour, but also a
full measure of the faults, of a hasty production. It is often very
literal--barbarously literal frequently--but just as often very loose. He
had evidently a good colloquial knowledge of Spanish, but apparently not
much more. It never seems to occur to him that the same translation of a
word will not suit in every case.

It is often said that we have no satisfactory translation of "Don
Quixote." To those who are familiar with the original, it savours of
truism or platitude to say so, for in truth there can be no thoroughly
satisfactory translation of "Don Quixote" into English or any other
language. It is not that the Spanish idioms are so utterly unmanageable,
or that the untranslatable words, numerous enough no doubt, are so
superabundant, but rather that the sententious terseness to which the
humour of the book owes its flavour is peculiar to Spanish, and can at
best be only distantly imitated in any other tongue.

The history of our English translations of "Don Quixote" is instructive.
Shelton's, the first in any language, was made, apparently, about 1608,
but not published till 1612. This of course was only the First Part. It
has been asserted that the Second, published in 1620, is not the work of
Shelton, but there is nothing to support the assertion save the fact that
it has less spirit, less of what we generally understand by "go," about
it than the first, which would be only natural if the first were the work
of a young man writing currente calamo, and the second that of a
middle-aged man writing for a bookseller. On the other hand, it is closer
and more literal, the style is the same, the very same translations, or
mistranslations, occur in it, and it is extremely unlikely that a new
translator would, by suppressing his name, have allowed Shelton to carry
off the credit.

In 1687 John Phillips, Milton's nephew, produced a "Don Quixote" "made
English," he says, "according to the humour of our modern language." His
"Quixote" is not so much a translation as a travesty, and a travesty that
for coarseness, vulgarity, and buffoonery is almost unexampled even in
the literature of that day.

Ned Ward's "Life and Notable Adventures of Don Quixote, merrily
translated into Hudibrastic Verse" (1700), can scarcely be reckoned a
translation, but it serves to show the light in which "Don Quixote" was
regarded at the time.

A further illustration may be found in the version published in 1712 by
Peter Motteux, who had then recently combined tea-dealing with
literature. It is described as "translated from the original by several
hands," but if so all Spanish flavour has entirely evaporated under the
manipulation of the several hands. The flavour that it has, on the other
hand, is distinctly Franco-cockney. Anyone who compares it carefully with
the original will have little doubt that it is a concoction from Shelton
and the French of Filleau de Saint Martin, eked out by borrowings from
Phillips, whose mode of treatment it adopts. It is, to be sure, more
decent and decorous, but it treats "Don Quixote" in the same fashion as a
comic book that cannot be made too comic.

To attempt to improve the humour of "Don Quixote" by an infusion of
cockney flippancy and facetiousness, as Motteux's operators did, is not
merely an impertinence like larding a sirloin of prize beef, but an
absolute falsification of the spirit of the book, and it is a proof of
the uncritical way in which "Don Quixote" is generally read that this
worse than worthless translation--worthless as failing to represent,
worse than worthless as misrepresenting--should have been favoured as it
has been.

It had the effect, however, of bringing out a translation undertaken and
executed in a very different spirit, that of Charles Jervas, the portrait
painter, and friend of Pope, Swift, Arbuthnot, and Gay. Jervas has been
allowed little credit for his work, indeed it may be said none, for it is
known to the world in general as Jarvis's. It was not published until
after his death, and the printers gave the name according to the current
pronunciation of the day. It has been the most freely used and the most
freely abused of all the translations. It has seen far more editions than
any other, it is admitted on all hands to be by far the most faithful,
and yet nobody seems to have a good word to say for it or for its author.
Jervas no doubt prejudiced readers against himself in his preface, where
among many true words about Shelton, Stevens, and Motteux, he rashly and
unjustly charges Shelton with having translated not from the Spanish, but
from the Italian version of Franciosini, which did not appear until ten
years after Shelton's first volume. A suspicion of incompetence, too,
seems to have attached to him because he was by profession a painter and
a mediocre one (though he has given us the best portrait we have of
Swift), and this may have been strengthened by Pope's remark that he
"translated 'Don Quixote' without understanding Spanish." He has been
also charged with borrowing from Shelton, whom he disparaged. It is true
that in a few difficult or obscure passages he has followed Shelton, and
gone astray with him; but for one case of this sort, there are fifty
where he is right and Shelton wrong. As for Pope's dictum, anyone who
examines Jervas's version carefully, side by side with the original, will
see that he was a sound Spanish scholar, incomparably a better one than
Shelton, except perhaps in mere colloquial Spanish. He was, in fact, an
honest, faithful, and painstaking translator, and he has left a version
which, whatever its shortcomings may be, is singularly free from errors
and mistranslations.

The charge against it is that it is stiff, dry--"wooden" in a word,-and
no one can deny that there is a foundation for it. But it may be pleaded
for Jervas that a good deal of this rigidity is due to his abhorrence of
the light, flippant, jocose style of his predecessors. He was one of the
few, very few, translators that have shown any apprehension of the
unsmiling gravity which is the essence of Quixotic humour; it seemed to
him a crime to bring Cervantes forward smirking and grinning at his own
good things, and to this may be attributed in a great measure the ascetic
abstinence from everything savouring of liveliness which is the
characteristic of his translation. In most modern editions, it should be
observed, his style has been smoothed and smartened, but without any
reference to the original Spanish, so that if he has been made to read
more agreeably he has also been robbed of his chief merit of fidelity.

Smollett's version, published in 1755, may be almost counted as one of
these. At any rate it is plain that in its construction Jervas's
translation was very freely drawn upon, and very little or probably no
heed given to the original Spanish.

The later translations may be dismissed in a few words. George Kelly's,
which appeared in 1769, "printed for the Translator," was an impudent
imposture, being nothing more than Motteux's version with a few of the
words, here and there, artfully transposed; Charles Wilmot's (1774) was
only an abridgment like Florian's, but not so skilfully executed; and the
version published by Miss Smirke in 1818, to accompany her brother's
plates, was merely a patchwork production made out of former
translations. On the latest, Mr. A. J. Duffield's, it would be in every
sense of the word impertinent in me to offer an opinion here. I had not
even seen it when the present undertaking was proposed to me, and since
then I may say vidi tantum, having for obvious reasons resisted the
temptation which Mr. Duffield's reputation and comely volumes hold out to
every lover of Cervantes.

From the foregoing history of our translations of "Don Quixote," it will
be seen that there are a good many people who, provided they get the mere
narrative with its full complement of facts, incidents, and adventures
served up to them in a form that amuses them, care very little whether
that form is the one in which Cervantes originally shaped his ideas. On
the other hand, it is clear that there are many who desire to have not
merely the story he tells, but the story as he tells it, so far at least
as differences of idiom and circumstances permit, and who will give a
preference to the conscientious translator, even though he may have
acquitted himself somewhat awkwardly.

But after all there is no real antagonism between the two classes; there
is no reason why what pleases the one should not please the other, or why
a translator who makes it his aim to treat "Don Quixote" with the respect
due to a great classic, should not be as acceptable even to the careless
reader as the one who treats it as a famous old jest-book. It is not a
question of caviare to the general, or, if it is, the fault rests with
him who makes so. The method by which Cervantes won the ear of the
Spanish people ought, mutatis mutandis, to be equally effective with the
great majority of English readers. At any rate, even if there are readers
to whom it is a matter of indifference, fidelity to the method is as much
a part of the translator's duty as fidelity to the matter. If he can
please all parties, so much the better; but his first duty is to those
who look to him for as faithful a representation of his author as it is
in his power to give them, faithful to the letter so long as fidelity is
practicable, faithful to the spirit so far as he can make it.

My purpose here is not to dogmatise on the rules of translation, but to
indicate those I have followed, or at least tried to the best of my
ability to follow, in the present instance. One which, it seems to me,
cannot be too rigidly followed in translating "Don Quixote," is to avoid
everything that savours of affectation. The book itself is, indeed, in
one sense a protest against it, and no man abhorred it more than
Cervantes. For this reason, I think, any temptation to use antiquated or
obsolete language should be resisted. It is after all an affectation, and
one for which there is no warrant or excuse. Spanish has probably
undergone less change since the seventeenth century than any language in
Europe, and by far the greater and certainly the best part of "Don
Quixote" differs but little in language from the colloquial Spanish of
the present day. Except in the tales and Don Quixote's speeches, the
translator who uses the simplest and plainest everyday language will
almost always be the one who approaches nearest to the original.

Seeing that the story of "Don Quixote" and all its characters and
incidents have now been for more than two centuries and a half familiar
as household words in English mouths, it seems to me that the old
familiar names and phrases should not be changed without good reason. Of
course a translator who holds that "Don Quixote" should receive the
treatment a great classic deserves, will feel himself bound by the
injunction laid upon the Morisco in Chap. IX not to omit or add anything.

II: ABOUT CERVANTES AND DON QUIXOTE

Four generations had laughed over "Don Quixote" before it occurred to
anyone to ask, who and what manner of man was this Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra whose name is on the title-page; and it was too late for a
satisfactory answer to the question when it was proposed to add a life of
the author to the London edition published at Lord Carteret's instance in
1738. All traces of the personality of Cervantes had by that time
disappeared. Any floating traditions that may once have existed,
transmitted from men who had known him, had long since died out, and of
other record there was none; for the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
were incurious as to "the men of the time," a reproach against which the
nineteenth has, at any rate, secured itself, if it has produced no
Shakespeare or Cervantes. All that Mayans y Siscar, to whom the task was
entrusted, or any of those who followed him, Rios, Pellicer, or
Navarrete, could do was to eke out the few allusions Cervantes makes to
himself in his various prefaces with such pieces of documentary evidence
bearing upon his life as they could find.

This, however, has been done by the last-named biographer to such good
purpose that he has superseded all predecessors. Thoroughness is the
chief characteristic of Navarrete's work. Besides sifting, testing, and
methodising with rare patience and judgment what had been previously
brought to light, he left, as the saying is, no stone unturned under
which anything to illustrate his subject might possibly be found.
Navarrete has done all that industry and acumen could do, and it is no
fault of his if he has not given us what we want. What Hallam says of
Shakespeare may be applied to the almost parallel case of Cervantes: "It
is not the register of his baptism, or the draft of his will, or the
orthography of his name that we seek; no letter of his writing, no record
of his conversation, no character of him drawn ... by a contemporary has
been produced."

It is only natural, therefore, that the biographers of Cervantes, forced
to make brick without straw, should have recourse largely to conjecture,
and that conjecture should in some instances come by degrees to take the
place of established fact. All that I propose to do here is to separate
what is matter of fact from what is matter of conjecture, and leave it to
the reader's judgment to decide whether the data justify the inference or
not.

The men whose names by common consent stand in the front rank of Spanish
literature, Cervantes, Lope de Vega, Quevedo, Calderon, Garcilaso de la
Vega, the Mendozas, Gongora, were all men of ancient families, and,
curiously, all, except the last, of families that traced their origin to
the same mountain district in the North of Spain. The family of Cervantes
is commonly said to have been of Galician origin, and unquestionably it
was in possession of lands in Galicia at a very early date; but I think
the balance of the evidence tends to show that the "solar," the original
site of the family, was at Cervatos in the north-west corner of Old
Castile, close to the junction of Castile, Leon, and the Asturias. As it
happens, there is a complete history of the Cervantes family from the
tenth century down to the seventeenth extant under the title of
"Illustrious Ancestry, Glorious Deeds, and Noble Posterity of the Famous
Nuno Alfonso, Alcaide of Toledo," written in 1648 by the industrious
genealogist Rodrigo Mendez Silva, who availed himself of a manuscript
genealogy by Juan de Mena, the poet laureate and historiographer of John
II.

The origin of the name Cervantes is curious. Nuno Alfonso was almost as
distinguished in the struggle against the Moors in the reign of Alfonso
VII as the Cid had been half a century before in that of Alfonso VI, and
was rewarded by divers grants of land in the neighbourhood of Toledo. On
one of his acquisitions, about two leagues from the city, he built
himself a castle which he called Cervatos, because "he was lord of the
solar of Cervatos in the Montana," as the mountain region extending from
the Basque Provinces to Leon was always called. At his death in battle in
1143, the castle passed by his will to his son Alfonso Munio, who, as
territorial or local surnames were then coming into vogue in place of the
simple patronymic, took the additional name of Cervatos. His eldest son
Pedro succeeded him in the possession of the castle, and followed his
example in adopting the name, an assumption at which the younger son,
Gonzalo, seems to have taken umbrage.

Everyone who has paid even a flying visit to Toledo will remember the
ruined castle that crowns the hill above the spot where the bridge of
Alcantara spans the gorge of the Tagus, and with its broken outline and
crumbling walls makes such an admirable pendant to the square solid
Alcazar towering over the city roofs on the opposite side. It was built,
or as some say restored, by Alfonso VI shortly after his occupation of
Toledo in 1085, and called by him San Servando after a Spanish martyr, a
name subsequently modified into San Servan (in which form it appears in
the "Poem of the Cid"), San Servantes, and San Cervantes: with regard to
which last the "Handbook for Spain" warns its readers against the
supposition that it has anything to do with the author of "Don Quixote."
Ford, as all know who have taken him for a companion and counsellor on
the roads of Spain, is seldom wrong in matters of literature or history.
In this instance, however, he is in error. It has everything to do with
the author of "Don Quixote," for it is in fact these old walls that have
given to Spain the name she is proudest of to-day. Gonzalo, above
mentioned, it may be readily conceived, did not relish the appropriation
by his brother of a name to which he himself had an equal right, for
though nominally taken from the castle, it was in reality derived from
the ancient territorial possession of the family, and as a set-off, and
to distinguish himself (diferenciarse) from his brother, he took as a
surname the name of the castle on the bank of the Tagus, in the building
of which, according to a family tradition, his great-grandfather had a
share.

Both brothers founded families. The Cervantes branch had more tenacity;
it sent offshoots in various directions, Andalusia, Estremadura, Galicia,
and Portugal, and produced a goodly line of men distinguished in the
service of Church and State. Gonzalo himself, and apparently a son of
his, followed Ferdinand III in the great campaign of 1236-48 that gave
Cordova and Seville to Christian Spain and penned up the Moors in the
kingdom of Granada, and his descendants intermarried with some of the
noblest families of the Peninsula and numbered among them soldiers,
magistrates, and Church dignitaries, including at least two
cardinal-archbishops.

Of the line that settled in Andalusia, Deigo de Cervantes, Commander of
the Order of Santiago, married Juana Avellaneda, daughter of Juan Arias
de Saavedra, and had several sons, of whom one was Gonzalo Gomez,
Corregidor of Jerez and ancestor of the Mexican and Columbian branches of
the family; and another, Juan, whose son Rodrigo married Dona Leonor de
Cortinas, and by her had four children, Rodrigo, Andrea, Luisa, and
Miguel, our author.

The pedigree of Cervantes is not without its bearing on "Don Quixote." A
man who could look back upon an ancestry of genuine knights-errant
extending from well-nigh the time of Pelayo to the siege of Granada was
likely to have a strong feeling on the subject of the sham chivalry of
the romances. It gives a point, too, to what he says in more than one
place about families that have once been great and have tapered away
until they have come to nothing, like a pyramid. It was the case of his
own.

He was born at Alcala de Henares and baptised in the church of Santa
Maria Mayor on the 9th of October, 1547. Of his boyhood and youth we know
nothing, unless it be from the glimpse he gives us in the preface to his
"Comedies" of himself as a boy looking on with delight while Lope de
Rueda and his company set up their rude plank stage in the plaza and
acted the rustic farces which he himself afterwards took as the model of
his interludes. This first glimpse, however, is a significant one, for it
shows the early development of that love of the drama which exercised
such an influence on his life and seems to have grown stronger as he grew
older, and of which this very preface, written only a few months before
his death, is such a striking proof. He gives us to understand, too, that
he was a great reader in his youth; but of this no assurance was needed,
for the First Part of "Don Quixote" alone proves a vast amount of
miscellaneous reading, romances of chivalry, ballads, popular poetry,
chronicles, for which he had no time or opportunity except in the first
twenty years of his life; and his misquotations and mistakes in matters
of detail are always, it may be noticed, those of a man recalling the
reading of his boyhood.

Other things besides the drama were in their infancy when Cervantes was a
boy. The period of his boyhood was in every way a transition period for
Spain. The old chivalrous Spain had passed away. The new Spain was the
mightiest power the world had seen since the Roman Empire and it had not
yet been called upon to pay the price of its greatness. By the policy of
Ferdinand and Ximenez the sovereign had been made absolute, and the
Church and Inquisition adroitly adjusted to keep him so. The nobles, who
had always resisted absolutism as strenuously as they had fought the
Moors, had been divested of all political power, a like fate had befallen
the cities, the free constitutions of Castile and Aragon had been swept
away, and the only function that remained to the Cortes was that of
granting money at the King's dictation.

The transition extended to literature. Men who, like Garcilaso de la Vega
and Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, followed the Italian wars, had brought back
from Italy the products of the post-Renaissance literature, which took
root and flourished and even threatened to extinguish the native growths.
Damon and Thyrsis, Phyllis and Chloe had been fairly naturalised in
Spain, together with all the devices of pastoral poetry for investing
with an air of novelty the idea of a dispairing shepherd and inflexible
shepherdess. As a set-off against this, the old historical and
traditional ballads, and the true pastorals, the songs and ballads of
peasant life, were being collected assiduously and printed in the
cancioneros that succeeded one another with increasing rapidity. But the
most notable consequence, perhaps, of the spread of printing was the
flood of romances of chivalry that had continued to pour from the press
ever since Garci Ordonez de Montalvo had resuscitated "Amadis of Gaul" at
the beginning of the century.

For a youth fond of reading, solid or light, there could have been no
better spot in Spain than Alcala de Henares in the middle of the
sixteenth century. It was then a busy, populous university town,
something more than the enterprising rival of Salamanca, and altogether a
very different place from the melancholy, silent, deserted Alcala the
traveller sees now as he goes from Madrid to Saragossa. Theology and
medicine may have been the strong points of the university, but the town
itself seems to have inclined rather to the humanities and light
literature, and as a producer of books Alcala was already beginning to
compete with the older presses of Toledo, Burgos, Salamanca and Seville.

A pendant to the picture Cervantes has given us of his first playgoings
might, no doubt, have been often seen in the streets of Alcala at that
time; a bright, eager, tawny-haired boy peering into a book-shop where
the latest volumes lay open to tempt the public, wondering, it may be,
what that little book with the woodcut of the blind beggar and his boy,
that called itself "Vida de Lazarillo de Tormes, segunda impresion,"
could be about; or with eyes brimming over with merriment gazing at one
of those preposterous portraits of a knight-errant in outrageous panoply
and plumes with which the publishers of chivalry romances loved to
embellish the title-pages of their folios. If the boy was the father of
the man, the sense of the incongruous that was strong at fifty was lively
at ten, and some such reflections as these may have been the true genesis
of "Don Quixote."

For his more solid education, we are told, he went to Salamanca. But why
Rodrigo de Cervantes, who was very poor, should have sent his son to a
university a hundred and fifty miles away when he had one at his own
door, would be a puzzle, if we had any reason for supposing that he did
so. The only evidence is a vague statement by Professor Tomas Gonzalez,
that he once saw an old entry of the matriculation of a Miguel de
Cervantes. This does not appear to have been ever seen again; but even if
it had, and if the date corresponded, it would prove nothing, as there
were at least two other Miguels born about the middle of the century; one
of them, moreover, a Cervantes Saavedra, a cousin, no doubt, who was a
source of great embarrassment to the biographers.

That he was a student neither at Salamanca nor at Alcala is best proved
by his own works. No man drew more largely upon experience than he did,
and he has nowhere left a single reminiscence of student life-for the
"Tia Fingida," if it be his, is not one--nothing, not even "a college
joke," to show that he remembered days that most men remember best. All
that we know positively about his education is that Juan Lopez de Hoyos,
a professor of humanities and belles-lettres of some eminence, calls him
his "dear and beloved pupil." This was in a little collection of verses
by different hands on the death of Isabel de Valois, second queen of
Philip II, published by the professor in 1569, to which Cervantes
contributed four pieces, including an elegy, and an epitaph in the form
of a sonnet. It is only by a rare chance that a "Lycidas" finds its way
into a volume of this sort, and Cervantes was no Milton. His verses are
no worse than such things usually are; so much, at least, may be said for
them.

By the time the book appeared he had left Spain, and, as fate ordered it,
for twelve years, the most eventful ones of his life. Giulio, afterwards
Cardinal, Acquaviva had been sent at the end of 1568 to Philip II by the
Pope on a mission, partly of condolence, partly political, and on his
return to Rome, which was somewhat brusquely expedited by the King, he
took Cervantes with him as his camarero (chamberlain), the office he
himself held in the Pope's household. The post would no doubt have led to
advancement at the Papal Court had Cervantes retained it, but in the
summer of 1570 he resigned it and enlisted as a private soldier in
Captain Diego Urbina's company, belonging to Don Miguel de Moncada's
regiment, but at that time forming a part of the command of Marc Antony
Colonna. What impelled him to this step we know not, whether it was
distaste for the career before him, or purely military enthusiasm. It may
well have been the latter, for it was a stirring time; the events,
however, which led to the alliance between Spain, Venice, and the Pope,
against the common enemy, the Porte, and to the victory of the combined
fleets at Lepanto, belong rather to the history of Europe than to the
life of Cervantes. He was one of those that sailed from Messina, in
September 1571, under the command of Don John of Austria; but on the
morning of the 7th of October, when the Turkish fleet was sighted, he was
lying below ill with fever. At the news that the enemy was in sight he
rose, and, in spite of the remonstrances of his comrades and superiors,
insisted on taking his post, saying he preferred death in the service of
God and the King to health. His galley, the Marquesa, was in the thick of
the fight, and before it was over he had received three gunshot wounds,
two in the breast and one in the left hand or arm. On the morning after
the battle, according to Navarrete, he had an interview with the
commander-in-chief, Don John, who was making a personal inspection of the
wounded, one result of which was an addition of three crowns to his pay,
and another, apparently, the friendship of his general.

How severely Cervantes was wounded may be inferred from the fact, that
with youth, a vigorous frame, and as cheerful and buoyant a temperament
as ever invalid had, he was seven months in hospital at Messina before he
was discharged. He came out with his left hand permanently disabled; he
had lost the use of it, as Mercury told him in the "Viaje del Parnaso"
for the greater glory of the right. This, however, did not absolutely
unfit him for service, and in April 1572 he joined Manuel Ponce de Leon's
company of Lope de Figueroa's regiment, in which, it seems probable, his
brother Rodrigo was serving, and shared in the operations of the next
three years, including the capture of the Goletta and Tunis. Taking
advantage of the lull which followed the recapture of these places by the
Turks, he obtained leave to return to Spain, and sailed from Naples in
September 1575 on board the Sun galley, in company with his brother
Rodrigo, Pedro Carrillo de Quesada, late Governor of the Goletta, and
some others, and furnished with letters from Don John of Austria and the
Duke of Sesa, the Viceroy of Sicily, recommending him to the King for the
command of a company, on account of his services; a dono infelice as
events proved. On the 26th they fell in with a squadron of Algerine
galleys, and after a stout resistance were overpowered and carried into
Algiers.

By means of a ransomed fellow-captive the brothers contrived to inform
their family of their condition, and the poor people at Alcala at once
strove to raise the ransom money, the father disposing of all he
possessed, and the two sisters giving up their marriage portions. But
Dali Mami had found on Cervantes the letters addressed to the King by Don
John and the Duke of Sesa, and, concluding that his prize must be a
person of great consequence, when the money came he refused it scornfully
as being altogether insufficient. The owner of Rodrigo, however, was more
easily satisfied; ransom was accepted in his case, and it was arranged
between the brothers that he should return to Spain and procure a vessel
in which he was to come back to Algiers and take off Miguel and as many
of their comrades as possible. This was not the first attempt to escape
that Cervantes had made. Soon after the commencement of his captivity he
induced several of his companions to join him in trying to reach Oran,
then a Spanish post, on foot; but after the first day's journey, the Moor
who had agreed to act as their guide deserted them, and they had no
choice but to return. The second attempt was more disastrous. In a garden
outside the city on the sea-shore, he constructed, with the help of the
gardener, a Spaniard, a hiding-place, to which he brought, one by one,
fourteen of his fellow-captives, keeping them there in secrecy for
several months, and supplying them with food through a renegade known as
El Dorador, "the Gilder." How he, a captive himself, contrived to do all
this, is one of the mysteries of the story. Wild as the project may
appear, it was very nearly successful. The vessel procured by Rodrigo
made its appearance off the coast, and under cover of night was
proceeding to take off the refugees, when the crew were alarmed by a
passing fishing boat, and beat a hasty retreat. On renewing the attempt
shortly afterwards, they, or a portion of them at least, were taken
prisoners, and just as the poor fellows in the garden were exulting in
the thought that in a few moments more freedom would be within their
grasp, they found themselves surrounded by Turkish troops, horse and
foot. The Dorador had revealed the whole scheme to the Dey Hassan.

When Cervantes saw what had befallen them, he charged his companions to
lay all the blame upon him, and as they were being bound he declared
aloud that the whole plot was of his contriving, and that nobody else had
any share in it. Brought before the Dey, he said the same. He was
threatened with impalement and with torture; and as cutting off ears and
noses were playful freaks with the Algerines, it may be conceived what
their tortures were like; but nothing could make him swerve from his
original statement that he and he alone was responsible. The upshot was
that the unhappy gardener was hanged by his master, and the prisoners
taken possession of by the Dey, who, however, afterwards restored most of
them to their masters, but kept Cervantes, paying Dali Mami 500 crowns
for him. He felt, no doubt, that a man of such resource, energy, and
daring, was too dangerous a piece of property to be left in private
hands; and he had him heavily ironed and lodged in his own prison. If he
thought that by these means he could break the spirit or shake the
resolution of his prisoner, he was soon undeceived, for Cervantes
contrived before long to despatch a letter to the Governor of Oran,
entreating him to send him some one that could be trusted, to enable him
and three other gentlemen, fellow-captives of his, to make their escape;
intending evidently to renew his first attempt with a more trustworthy
guide. Unfortunately the Moor who carried the letter was stopped just
outside Oran, and the letter being found upon him, he was sent back to
Algiers, where by the order of the Dey he was promptly impaled as a
warning to others, while Cervantes was condemned to receive two thousand
blows of the stick, a number which most likely would have deprived the
world of "Don Quixote," had not some persons, who they were we know not,
interceded on his behalf.

After this he seems to have been kept in still closer confinement than
before, for nearly two years passed before he made another attempt. This
time his plan was to purchase, by the aid of a Spanish renegade and two
Valencian merchants resident in Algiers, an armed vessel in which he and
about sixty of the leading captives were to make their escape; but just
as they were about to put it into execution one Doctor Juan Blanco de
Paz, an ecclesiastic and a compatriot, informed the Dey of the plot.
Cervantes by force of character, by his self-devotion, by his untiring
energy and his exertions to lighten the lot of his companions in misery,
had endeared himself to all, and become the leading spirit in the captive
colony, and, incredible as it may seem, jealousy of his influence and the
esteem in which he was held, moved this man to compass his destruction by
a cruel death. The merchants finding that the Dey knew all, and fearing
that Cervantes under torture might make disclosures that would imperil
their own lives, tried to persuade him to slip away on board a vessel
that was on the point of sailing for Spain; but he told them they had
nothing to fear, for no tortures would make him compromise anybody, and
he went at once and gave himself up to the Dey.

As before, the Dey tried to force him to name his accomplices. Everything
was made ready for his immediate execution; the halter was put round his
neck and his hands tied behind him, but all that could be got from him
was that he himself, with the help of four gentlemen who had since left
Algiers, had arranged the whole, and that the sixty who were to accompany
him were not to know anything of it until the last moment. Finding he
could make nothing of him, the Dey sent him back to prison more heavily
ironed than before.

The poverty-stricken Cervantes family had been all this time trying once
more to raise the ransom money, and at last a sum of three hundred ducats
was got together and entrusted to the Redemptorist Father Juan Gil, who
was about to sail for Algiers. The Dey, however, demanded more than
double the sum offered, and as his term of office had expired and he was
about to sail for Constantinople, taking all his slaves with him, the
case of Cervantes was critical. He was already on board heavily ironed,
when the Dey at length agreed to reduce his demand by one-half, and
Father Gil by borrowing was able to make up the amount, and on September
19, 1580, after a captivity of five years all but a week, Cervantes was
at last set free. Before long he discovered that Blanco de Paz, who
claimed to be an officer of the Inquisition, was now concocting on false
evidence a charge of misconduct to be brought against him on his return
to Spain. To checkmate him Cervantes drew up a series of twenty-five
questions, covering the whole period of his captivity, upon which he
requested Father Gil to take the depositions of credible witnesses before
a notary. Eleven witnesses taken from among the principal captives in
Algiers deposed to all the facts above stated and to a great deal more
besides. There is something touching in the admiration, love, and
gratitude we see struggling to find expression in the formal language of
the notary, as they testify one after another to the good deeds of
Cervantes, how he comforted and helped the weak-hearted, how he kept up
their drooping courage, how he shared his poor purse with this deponent,
and how "in him this deponent found father and mother."

On his return to Spain he found his old regiment about to march for
Portugal to support Philip's claim to the crown, and utterly penniless
now, had no choice but to rejoin it. He was in the expeditions to the
Azores in 1582 and the following year, and on the conclusion of the war
returned to Spain in the autumn of 1583, bringing with him the manuscript
of his pastoral romance, the "Galatea," and probably also, to judge by
internal evidence, that of the first portion of "Persiles and
Sigismunda." He also brought back with him, his biographers assert, an
infant daughter, the offspring of an amour, as some of them with great
circumstantiality inform us, with a Lisbon lady of noble birth, whose
name, however, as well as that of the street she lived in, they omit to
mention. The sole foundation for all this is that in 1605 there certainly
was living in the family of Cervantes a Dona Isabel de Saavedra, who is
described in an official document as his natural daughter, and then
twenty years of age.

With his crippled left hand promotion in the army was hopeless, now that
Don John was dead and he had no one to press his claims and services, and
for a man drawing on to forty life in the ranks was a dismal prospect; he
had already a certain reputation as a poet; he made up his mind,
therefore, to cast his lot with literature, and for a first venture
committed his "Galatea" to the press. It was published, as Salva y Mallen
shows conclusively, at Alcala, his own birth-place, in 1585 and no doubt
helped to make his name more widely known, but certainly did not do him
much good in any other way.

While it was going through the press, he married Dona Catalina de
Palacios Salazar y Vozmediano, a lady of Esquivias near Madrid, and
apparently a friend of the family, who brought him a fortune which may
possibly have served to keep the wolf from the door, but if so, that was
all. The drama had by this time outgrown market-place stages and
strolling companies, and with his old love for it he naturally turned to
it for a congenial employment. In about three years he wrote twenty or
thirty plays, which he tells us were performed without any throwing of
cucumbers or other missiles, and ran their course without any hisses,
outcries, or disturbance. In other words, his plays were not bad enough
to be hissed off the stage, but not good enough to hold their own upon
it. Only two of them have been preserved, but as they happen to be two of
the seven or eight he mentions with complacency, we may assume they are
favourable specimens, and no one who reads the "Numancia" and the "Trato
de Argel" will feel any surprise that they failed as acting dramas.
Whatever merits they may have, whatever occasional they may show, they
are, as regards construction, incurably clumsy. How completely they
failed is manifest from the fact that with all his sanguine temperament
and indomitable perseverance he was unable to maintain the struggle to
gain a livelihood as a dramatist for more than three years; nor was the
rising popularity of Lope the cause, as is often said, notwithstanding
his own words to the contrary. When Lope began to write for the stage is
uncertain, but it was certainly after Cervantes went to Seville.

Among the "Nuevos Documentos" printed by Senor Asensio y Toledo is one
dated 1592, and curiously characteristic of Cervantes. It is an agreement
with one Rodrigo Osorio, a manager, who was to accept six comedies at
fifty ducats (about 6l.) apiece, not to be paid in any case unless it
appeared on representation that the said comedy was one of the best that
had ever been represented in Spain. The test does not seem to have been
ever applied; perhaps it was sufficiently apparent to Rodrigo Osorio that
the comedies were not among the best that had ever been represented.
Among the correspondence of Cervantes there might have been found, no
doubt, more than one letter like that we see in the "Rake's Progress,"
"Sir, I have read your play, and it will not doo."

He was more successful in a literary contest at Saragossa in 1595 in
honour of the canonisation of St. Jacinto, when his composition won the
first prize, three silver spoons. The year before this he had been
appointed a collector of revenues for the kingdom of Granada. In order to
remit the money he had collected more conveniently to the treasury, he
entrusted it to a merchant, who failed and absconded; and as the
bankrupt's assets were insufficient to cover the whole, he was sent to
prison at Seville in September 1597. The balance against him, however,
was a small one, about 26l., and on giving security for it he was
released at the end of the year.

It was as he journeyed from town to town collecting the king's taxes,
that he noted down those bits of inn and wayside life and character that
abound in the pages of "Don Quixote:" the Benedictine monks with
spectacles and sunshades, mounted on their tall mules; the strollers in
costume bound for the next village; the barber with his basin on his
head, on his way to bleed a patient; the recruit with his breeches in his
bundle, tramping along the road singing; the reapers gathered in the
venta gateway listening to "Felixmarte of Hircania" read out to them; and
those little Hogarthian touches that he so well knew how to bring in, the
ox-tail hanging up with the landlord's comb stuck in it, the wine-skins
at the bed-head, and those notable examples of hostelry art, Helen going
off in high spirits on Paris's arm, and Dido on the tower dropping tears
as big as walnuts. Nay, it may well be that on those journeys into remote
regions he came across now and then a specimen of the pauper gentleman,
with his lean hack and his greyhound and his books of chivalry, dreaming
away his life in happy ignorance that the world had changed since his
great-grandfather's old helmet was new. But it was in Seville that he
found out his true vocation, though he himself would not by any means
have admitted it to be so. It was there, in Triana, that he was first
tempted to try his hand at drawing from life, and first brought his
humour into play in the exquisite little sketch of "Rinconete y
Cortadillo," the germ, in more ways than one, of "Don Quixote."

Where and when that was written, we cannot tell. After his imprisonment
all trace of Cervantes in his official capacity disappears, from which it
may be inferred that he was not reinstated. That he was still in Seville
in November 1598 appears from a satirical sonnet of his on the elaborate
catafalque erected to testify the grief of the city at the death of
Philip II, but from this up to 1603 we have no clue to his movements. The
words in the preface to the First Part of "Don Quixote" are generally
held to be conclusive that he conceived the idea of the book, and wrote
the beginning of it at least, in a prison, and that he may have done so
is extremely likely.

There is a tradition that Cervantes read some portions of his work to a
select audience at the Duke of Bejar's, which may have helped to make the
book known; but the obvious conclusion is that the First Part of "Don
Quixote" lay on his hands some time before he could find a publisher bold
enough to undertake a venture of so novel a character; and so little
faith in it had Francisco Robles of Madrid, to whom at last he sold it,
that he did not care to incur the expense of securing the copyright for
Aragon or Portugal, contenting himself with that for Castile. The
printing was finished in December, and the book came out with the new
year, 1605. It is often said that "Don Quixote" was at first received
coldly. The facts show just the contrary. No sooner was it in the hands
of the public than preparations were made to issue pirated editions at
Lisbon and Valencia, and to bring out a second edition with the
additional copyrights for Aragon and Portugal, which he secured in
February.

No doubt it was received with something more than coldness by certain
sections of the community. Men of wit, taste, and discrimination among
the aristocracy gave it a hearty welcome, but the aristocracy in general
were not likely to relish a book that turned their favourite reading into
ridicule and laughed at so many of their favourite ideas. The dramatists
who gathered round Lope as their leader regarded Cervantes as their
common enemy, and it is plain that he was equally obnoxious to the other
clique, the culto poets who had Gongora for their chief. Navarrete, who
knew nothing of the letter above mentioned, tries hard to show that the
relations between Cervantes and Lope were of a very friendly sort, as
indeed they were until "Don Quixote" was written. Cervantes, indeed, to
the last generously and manfully declared his admiration of Lope's
powers, his unfailing invention, and his marvellous fertility; but in the
preface of the First Part of "Don Quixote" and in the verses of "Urganda
the Unknown," and one or two other places, there are, if we read between
the lines, sly hits at Lope's vanities and affectations that argue no
personal good-will; and Lope openly sneers at "Don Quixote" and
Cervantes, and fourteen years after his death gives him only a few lines
of cold commonplace in the "Laurel de Apolo," that seem all the colder
for the eulogies of a host of nonentities whose names are found nowhere
else.

In 1601 Valladolid was made the seat of the Court, and at the beginning
of 1603 Cervantes had been summoned thither in connection with the
balance due by him to the Treasury, which was still outstanding. He
remained at Valladolid, apparently supporting himself by agencies and
scrivener's work of some sort; probably drafting petitions and drawing up
statements of claims to be presented to the Council, and the like. So, at
least, we gather from the depositions taken on the occasion of the death
of a gentleman, the victim of a street brawl, who had been carried into
the house in which he lived. In these he himself is described as a man
who wrote and transacted business, and it appears that his household then
consisted of his wife, the natural daughter Isabel de Saavedra already
mentioned, his sister Andrea, now a widow, her daughter Constanza, a
mysterious Magdalena de Sotomayor calling herself his sister, for whom
his biographers cannot account, and a servant-maid.

Meanwhile "Don Quixote" had been growing in favour, and its author's name
was now known beyond the Pyrenees. In 1607 an edition was printed at
Brussels. Robles, the Madrid publisher, found it necessary to meet the
demand by a third edition, the seventh in all, in 1608. The popularity of
the book in Italy was such that a Milan bookseller was led to bring out
an edition in 1610; and another was called for in Brussels in 1611. It
might naturally have been expected that, with such proofs before him that
he had hit the taste of the public, Cervantes would have at once set
about redeeming his rather vague promise of a second volume.

But, to all appearance, nothing was farther from his thoughts. He had
still by him one or two short tales of the same vintage as those he had
inserted in "Don Quixote" and instead of continuing the adventures of Don
Quixote, he set to work to write more of these "Novelas Exemplares" as he
afterwards called them, with a view to making a book of them.

The novels were published in the summer of 1613, with a dedication to the
Conde de Lemos, the Maecenas of the day, and with one of those chatty
confidential prefaces Cervantes was so fond of. In this, eight years and
a half after the First Part of "Don Quixote" had appeared, we get the
first hint of a forthcoming Second Part. "You shall see shortly," he
says, "the further exploits of Don Quixote and humours of Sancho Panza."
His idea of "shortly" was a somewhat elastic one, for, as we know by the
date to Sancho's letter, he had barely one-half of the book completed
that time twelvemonth.

But more than poems, or pastorals, or novels, it was his dramatic
ambition that engrossed his thoughts. The same indomitable spirit that
kept him from despair in the bagnios of Algiers, and prompted him to
attempt the escape of himself and his comrades again and again, made him
persevere in spite of failure and discouragement in his efforts to win
the ear of the public as a dramatist. The temperament of Cervantes was
essentially sanguine. The portrait he draws in the preface to the novels,
with the aquiline features, chestnut hair, smooth untroubled forehead,
and bright cheerful eyes, is the very portrait of a sanguine man. Nothing
that the managers might say could persuade him that the merits of his
plays would not be recognised at last if they were only given a fair
chance. The old soldier of the Spanish Salamis was bent on being the
Aeschylus of Spain. He was to found a great national drama, based on the
true principles of art, that was to be the envy of all nations; he was to
drive from the stage the silly, childish plays, the "mirrors of nonsense
and models of folly" that were in vogue through the cupidity of the
managers and shortsightedness of the authors; he was to correct and
educate the public taste until it was ripe for tragedies on the model of
the Greek drama--like the "Numancia" for instance--and comedies that
would not only amuse but improve and instruct. All this he was to do,
could he once get a hearing: there was the initial difficulty.

He shows plainly enough, too, that "Don Quixote" and the demolition of
the chivalry romances was not the work that lay next his heart. He was,
indeed, as he says himself in his preface, more a stepfather than a
father to "Don Quixote." Never was great work so neglected by its author.
That it was written carelessly, hastily, and by fits and starts, was not
always his fault, but it seems clear he never read what he sent to the
press. He knew how the printers had blundered, but he never took the
trouble to correct them when the third edition was in progress, as a man
who really cared for the child of his brain would have done. He appears
to have regarded the book as little more than a mere libro de
entretenimiento, an amusing book, a thing, as he says in the "Viaje," "to
divert the melancholy moody heart at any time or season." No doubt he had
an affection for his hero, and was very proud of Sancho Panza. It would
have been strange indeed if he had not been proud of the most humorous
creation in all fiction. He was proud, too, of the popularity and success
of the book, and beyond measure delightful is the naivete with which he
shows his pride in a dozen passages in the Second Part. But it was not
the success he coveted. In all probability he would have given all the
success of "Don Quixote," nay, would have seen every copy of "Don
Quixote" burned in the Plaza Mayor, for one such success as Lope de Vega
was enjoying on an average once a week.

And so he went on, dawdling over "Don Quixote," adding a chapter now and
again, and putting it aside to turn to "Persiles and Sigismunda"--which,
as we know, was to be the most entertaining book in the language, and the
rival of "Theagenes and Chariclea"--or finishing off one of his darling
comedies; and if Robles asked when "Don Quixote" would be ready, the
answer no doubt was: En breve-shortly, there was time enough for that. At
sixty-eight he was as full of life and hope and plans for the future as a
boy of eighteen.

Nemesis was coming, however. He had got as far as Chapter LIX, which at
his leisurely pace he could hardly have reached before October or
November 1614, when there was put into his hand a small octave lately
printed at Tarragona, and calling itself "Second Volume of the Ingenious
Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha: by the Licentiate Alonso Fernandez de
Avellaneda of Tordesillas." The last half of Chapter LIX and most of the
following chapters of the Second Part give us some idea of the effect
produced upon him, and his irritation was not likely to be lessened by
the reflection that he had no one to blame but himself. Had Avellaneda,
in fact, been content with merely bringing out a continuation to "Don
Quixote," Cervantes would have had no reasonable grievance. His own
intentions were expressed in the very vaguest language at the end of the
book; nay, in his last words, "forse altro cantera con miglior plettro,"
he seems actually to invite some one else to continue the work, and he
made no sign until eight years and a half had gone by; by which time
Avellaneda's volume was no doubt written.

In fact Cervantes had no case, or a very bad one, as far as the mere
continuation was concerned. But Avellaneda chose to write a preface to
it, full of such coarse personal abuse as only an ill-conditioned man
could pour out. He taunts Cervantes with being old, with having lost his
hand, with having been in prison, with being poor, with being friendless,
accuses him of envy of Lope's success, of petulance and querulousness,
and so on; and it was in this that the sting lay. Avellaneda's reason for
this personal attack is obvious enough. Whoever he may have been, it is
clear that he was one of the dramatists of Lope's school, for he has the
impudence to charge Cervantes with attacking him as well as Lope in his
criticism on the drama. His identification has exercised the best critics
and baffled all the ingenuity and research that has been brought to bear
on it. Navarrete and Ticknor both incline to the belief that Cervantes
knew who he was; but I must say I think the anger he shows suggests an
invisible assailant; it is like the irritation of a man stung by a
mosquito in the dark. Cervantes from certain solecisms of language
pronounces him to be an Aragonese, and Pellicer, an Aragonese himself,
supports this view and believes him, moreover, to have been an
ecclesiastic, a Dominican probably.

Any merit Avellaneda has is reflected from Cervantes, and he is too dull
to reflect much. "Dull and dirty" will always be, I imagine, the verdict
of the vast majority of unprejudiced readers. He is, at best, a poor
plagiarist; all he can do is to follow slavishly the lead given him by
Cervantes; his only humour lies in making Don Quixote take inns for
castles and fancy himself some legendary or historical personage, and
Sancho mistake words, invert proverbs, and display his gluttony; all
through he shows a proclivity to coarseness and dirt, and he has
contrived to introduce two tales filthier than anything by the sixteenth
century novellieri and without their sprightliness.

But whatever Avellaneda and his book may be, we must not forget the debt
we owe them. But for them, there can be no doubt, "Don Quixote" would
have come to us a mere torso instead of a complete work. Even if
Cervantes had finished the volume he had in hand, most assuredly he would
have left off with a promise of a Third Part, giving the further
adventures of Don Quixote and humours of Sancho Panza as shepherds. It is
plain that he had at one time an intention of dealing with the pastoral
romances as he had dealt with the books of chivalry, and but for
Avellaneda he would have tried to carry it out. But it is more likely
that, with his plans, and projects, and hopefulness, the volume would
have remained unfinished till his death, and that we should have never
made the acquaintance of the Duke and Duchess, or gone with Sancho to
Barataria.

From the moment the book came into his hands he seems to have been
haunted by the fear that there might be more Avellanedas in the field,
and putting everything else aside, he set himself to finish off his task
and protect Don Quixote in the only way he could, by killing him. The
conclusion is no doubt a hasty and in some places clumsy piece of work
and the frequent repetition of the scolding administered to Avellaneda
becomes in the end rather wearisome; but it is, at any rate, a conclusion
and for that we must thank Avellaneda.

The new volume was ready for the press in February, but was not printed
till the very end of 1615, and during the interval Cervantes put together
the comedies and interludes he had written within the last few years,
and, as he adds plaintively, found no demand for among the managers, and
published them with a preface, worth the book it introduces tenfold, in
which he gives an account of the early Spanish stage, and of his own
attempts as a dramatist. It is needless to say they were put forward by
Cervantes in all good faith and full confidence in their merits. The
reader, however, was not to suppose they were his last word or final
effort in the drama, for he had in hand a comedy called "Engano a los
ojos," about which, if he mistook not, there would be no question.

Of this dramatic masterpiece the world has no opportunity of judging; his
health had been failing for some time, and he died, apparently of dropsy,
on the 23rd of April, 1616, the day on which England lost Shakespeare,
nominally at least, for the English calendar had not yet been reformed.
He died as he had lived, accepting his lot bravely and cheerfully.

Was it an unhappy life, that of Cervantes? His biographers all tell us
that it was; but I must say I doubt it. It was a hard life, a life of
poverty, of incessant struggle, of toil ill paid, of disappointment, but
Cervantes carried within himself the antidote to all these evils. His was
not one of those light natures that rise above adversity merely by virtue
of their own buoyancy; it was in the fortitude of a high spirit that he
was proof against it. It is impossible to conceive Cervantes giving way
to despondency or prostrated by dejection. As for poverty, it was with
him a thing to be laughed over, and the only sigh he ever allows to
escape him is when he says, "Happy he to whom Heaven has given a piece of
bread for which he is not bound to give thanks to any but Heaven itself."
Add to all this his vital energy and mental activity, his restless
invention and his sanguine temperament, and there will be reason enough
to doubt whether his could have been a very unhappy life. He who could
take Cervantes' distresses together with his apparatus for enduring them
would not make so bad a bargain, perhaps, as far as happiness in life is
concerned.

Of his burial-place nothing is known except that he was buried, in
accordance with his will, in the neighbouring convent of Trinitarian
nuns, of which it is supposed his daughter, Isabel de Saavedra, was an
inmate, and that a few years afterwards the nuns removed to another
convent, carrying their dead with them. But whether the remains of
Cervantes were included in the removal or not no one knows, and the clue
to their resting-place is now lost beyond all hope. This furnishes
perhaps the least defensible of the items in the charge of neglect
brought against his contemporaries. In some of the others there is a good
deal of exaggeration. To listen to most of his biographers one would
suppose that all Spain was in league not only against the man but against
his memory, or at least that it was insensible to his merits, and left
him to live in misery and die of want. To talk of his hard life and
unworthy employments in Andalusia is absurd. What had he done to
distinguish him from thousands of other struggling men earning a
precarious livelihood? True, he was a gallant soldier, who had been
wounded and had undergone captivity and suffering in his country's cause,
but there were hundreds of others in the same case. He had written a
mediocre specimen of an insipid class of romance, and some plays which
manifestly did not comply with the primary condition of pleasing: were
the playgoers to patronise plays that did not amuse them, because the
author was to produce "Don Quixote" twenty years afterwards?

The scramble for copies which, as we have seen, followed immediately on
the appearance of the book, does not look like general insensibility to
its merits. No doubt it was received coldly by some, but if a man writes
a book in ridicule of periwigs he must make his account with being coldly
received by the periwig wearers and hated by the whole tribe of
wigmakers. If Cervantes had the chivalry-romance readers, the
sentimentalists, the dramatists, and the poets of the period all against
him, it was because "Don Quixote" was what it was; and if the general
public did not come forward to make him comfortable for the rest of his
days, it is no more to be charged with neglect and ingratitude than the
English-speaking public that did not pay off Scott's liabilities. It did
the best it could; it read his book and liked it and bought it, and
encouraged the bookseller to pay him well for others.

It has been also made a reproach to Spain that she has erected no
monument to the man she is proudest of; no monument, that is to say, of
him; for the bronze statue in the little garden of the Plaza de las
Cortes, a fair work of art no doubt, and unexceptionable had it been set
up to the local poet in the market-place of some provincial town, is not
worthy of Cervantes or of Madrid. But what need has Cervantes of "such
weak witness of his name;" or what could a monument do in his case except
testify to the self-glorification of those who had put it up? Si
monumentum quoeris, circumspice. The nearest bookseller's shop will show
what bathos there would be in a monument to the author of "Don Quixote."

Nine editions of the First Part of "Don Quixote" had already appeared
before Cervantes died, thirty thousand copies in all, according to his
own estimate, and a tenth was printed at Barcelona the year after his
death. So large a number naturally supplied the demand for some time, but
by 1634 it appears to have been exhausted; and from that time down to the
present day the stream of editions has continued to flow rapidly and
regularly. The translations show still more clearly in what request the
book has been from the very outset. In seven years from the completion of
the work it had been translated into the four leading languages of
Europe. Except the Bible, in fact, no book has been so widely diffused as
"Don Quixote." The "Imitatio Christi" may have been translated into as
many different languages, and perhaps "Robinson Crusoe" and the "Vicar of
Wakefield" into nearly as many, but in multiplicity of translations and
editions "Don Quixote" leaves them all far behind.

Still more remarkable is the character of this wide diffusion. "Don
Quixote" has been thoroughly naturalised among people whose ideas about
knight-errantry, if they had any at all, were of the vaguest, who had
never seen or heard of a book of chivalry, who could not possibly feel
the humour of the burlesque or sympathise with the author's purpose.
Another curious fact is that this, the most cosmopolitan book in the
world, is one of the most intensely national. "Manon Lescaut" is not more
thoroughly French, "Tom Jones" not more English, "Rob Roy" not more
Scotch, than "Don Quixote" is Spanish, in character, in ideas, in
sentiment, in local colour, in everything. What, then, is the secret of
this unparalleled popularity, increasing year by year for well-nigh three
centuries? One explanation, no doubt, is that of all the books in the
world, "Don Quixote" is the most catholic. There is something in it for
every sort of reader, young or old, sage or simple, high or low. As
Cervantes himself says with a touch of pride, "It is thumbed and read and
got by heart by people of all sorts; the children turn its leaves, the
young people read it, the grown men understand it, the old folk praise
it."

But it would be idle to deny that the ingredient which, more than its
humour, or its wisdom, or the fertility of invention or knowledge of
human nature it displays, has insured its success with the multitude, is
the vein of farce that runs through it. It was the attack upon the sheep,
the battle with the wine-skins, Mambrino's helmet, the balsam of
Fierabras, Don Quixote knocked over by the sails of the windmill, Sancho
tossed in the blanket, the mishaps and misadventures of master and man,
that were originally the great attraction, and perhaps are so still to
some extent with the majority of readers. It is plain that "Don Quixote"
was generally regarded at first, and indeed in Spain for a long time, as
little more than a queer droll book, full of laughable incidents and
absurd situations, very amusing, but not entitled to much consideration
or care. All the editions printed in Spain from 1637 to 1771, when the
famous printer Ibarra took it up, were mere trade editions, badly and
carelessly printed on vile paper and got up in the style of chap-books
intended only for popular use, with, in most instances, uncouth
illustrations and clap-trap additions by the publisher.

To England belongs the credit of having been the first country to
recognise the right of "Don Quixote" to better treatment than this. The
London edition of 1738, commonly called Lord Carteret's from having been
suggested by him, was not a mere edition de luxe. It produced "Don
Quixote" in becoming form as regards paper and type, and embellished with
plates which, if not particularly happy as illustrations, were at least
well intentioned and well executed, but it also aimed at correctness of
text, a matter to which nobody except the editors of the Valencia and
Brussels editions had given even a passing thought; and for a first
attempt it was fairly successful, for though some of its emendations are
inadmissible, a good many of them have been adopted by all subsequent
editors.

The zeal of publishers, editors, and annotators brought about a
remarkable change of sentiment with regard to "Don Quixote." A vast
number of its admirers began to grow ashamed of laughing over it. It
became almost a crime to treat it as a humorous book. The humour was not
entirely denied, but, according to the new view, it was rated as an
altogether secondary quality, a mere accessory, nothing more than the
stalking-horse under the presentation of which Cervantes shot his
philosophy or his satire, or whatever it was he meant to shoot; for on
this point opinions varied. All were agreed, however, that the object he
aimed at was not the books of chivalry. He said emphatically in the
preface to the First Part and in the last sentence of the Second, that he
had no other object in view than to discredit these books, and this, to
advanced criticism, made it clear that his object must have been
something else.

One theory was that the book was a kind of allegory, setting forth the
eternal struggle between the ideal and the real, between the spirit of
poetry and the spirit of prose; and perhaps German philosophy never
evolved a more ungainly or unlikely camel out of the depths of its inner
consciousness. Something of the antagonism, no doubt, is to be found in
"Don Quixote," because it is to be found everywhere in life, and
Cervantes drew from life. It is difficult to imagine a community in which
the never-ceasing game of cross-purposes between Sancho Panza and Don
Quixote would not be recognized as true to nature. In the stone age,
among the lake dwellers, among the cave men, there were Don Quixotes and
Sancho Panzas; there must have been the troglodyte who never could see
the facts before his eyes, and the troglodyte who could see nothing else.
But to suppose Cervantes deliberately setting himself to expound any such
idea in two stout quarto volumes is to suppose something not only very
unlike the age in which he lived, but altogether unlike Cervantes
himself, who would have been the first to laugh at an attempt of the sort
made by anyone else.

The extraordinary influence of the romances of chivalry in his day is
quite enough to account for the genesis of the book. Some idea of the
prodigious development of this branch of literature in the sixteenth
century may be obtained from the scrutiny of Chapter VII, if the reader
bears in mind that only a portion of the romances belonging to by far the
largest group are enumerated. As to its effect upon the nation, there is
abundant evidence. From the time when the Amadises and Palmerins began to
grow popular down to the very end of the century, there is a steady
stream of invective, from men whose character and position lend weight to
their words, against the romances of chivalry and the infatuation of
their readers. Ridicule was the only besom to sweep away that dust.

That this was the task Cervantes set himself, and that he had ample
provocation to urge him to it, will be sufficiently clear to those who
look into the evidence; as it will be also that it was not chivalry
itself that he attacked and swept away. Of all the absurdities that,
thanks to poetry, will be repeated to the end of time, there is no
greater one than saying that "Cervantes smiled Spain's chivalry away." In
the first place there was no chivalry for him to smile away. Spain's
chivalry had been dead for more than a century. Its work was done when
Granada fell, and as chivalry was essentially republican in its nature,
it could not live under the rule that Ferdinand substituted for the free
institutions of mediaeval Spain. What he did smile away was not chivalry
but a degrading mockery of it.

The true nature of the "right arm" and the "bright array," before which,
according to the poet, "the world gave ground," and which Cervantes'
single laugh demolished, may be gathered from the words of one of his own
countrymen, Don Felix Pacheco, as reported by Captain George Carleton, in
his "Military Memoirs from 1672 to 1713." "Before the appearance in the
world of that labour of Cervantes," he said, "it was next to an
impossibility for a man to walk the streets with any delight or without
danger. There were seen so many cavaliers prancing and curvetting before
the windows of their mistresses, that a stranger would have imagined the
whole nation to have been nothing less than a race of knight-errants. But
after the world became a little acquainted with that notable history, the
man that was seen in that once celebrated drapery was pointed at as a Don
Quixote, and found himself the jest of high and low. And I verily believe
that to this, and this only, we owe that dampness and poverty of spirit
which has run through all our councils for a century past, so little
agreeable to those nobler actions of our famous ancestors."

To call "Don Quixote" a sad book, preaching a pessimist view of life,
argues a total misconception of its drift. It would be so if its moral
were that, in this world, true enthusiasm naturally leads to ridicule and
discomfiture. But it preaches nothing of the sort; its moral, so far as
it can be said to have one, is that the spurious enthusiasm that is born
of vanity and self-conceit, that is made an end in itself, not a means to
an end, that acts on mere impulse, regardless of circumstances and
consequences, is mischievous to its owner, and a very considerable
nuisance to the community at large. To those who cannot distinguish
between the one kind and the other, no doubt "Don Quixote" is a sad book;
no doubt to some minds it is very sad that a man who had just uttered so
beautiful a sentiment as that "it is a hard case to make slaves of those
whom God and Nature made free," should be ungratefully pelted by the
scoundrels his crazy philanthropy had let loose on society; but to others
of a more judicial cast it will be a matter of regret that reckless
self-sufficient enthusiasm is not oftener requited in some such way for
all the mischief it does in the world.

A very slight examination of the structure of "Don Quixote" will suffice
to show that Cervantes had no deep design or elaborate plan in his mind
when he began the book. When he wrote those lines in which "with a few
strokes of a great master he sets before us the pauper gentleman," he had
no idea of the goal to which his imagination was leading him. There can
be little doubt that all he contemplated was a short tale to range with
those he had already written, a tale setting forth the ludicrous results
that might be expected to follow the attempt of a crazy gentleman to act
the part of a knight-errant in modern life.

It is plain, for one thing, that Sancho Panza did not enter into the
original scheme, for had Cervantes thought of him he certainly would not
have omitted him in his hero's outfit, which he obviously meant to be
complete. Him we owe to the landlord's chance remark in Chapter III that
knights seldom travelled without squires. To try to think of a Don
Quixote without Sancho Panza is like trying to think of a one-bladed pair
of scissors.

The story was written at first, like the others, without any division and
without the intervention of Cide Hamete Benengeli; and it seems not
unlikely that Cervantes had some intention of bringing Dulcinea, or
Aldonza Lorenzo, on the scene in person. It was probably the ransacking
of the Don's library and the discussion on the books of chivalry that
first suggested it to him that his idea was capable of development. What,
if instead of a mere string of farcical misadventures, he were to make
his tale a burlesque of one of these books, caricaturing their style,
incidents, and spirit?

In pursuance of this change of plan, he hastily and somewhat clumsily
divided what he had written into chapters on the model of "Amadis,"
invented the fable of a mysterious Arabic manuscript, and set up Cide
Hamete Benengeli in imitation of the almost invariable practice of the
chivalry-romance authors, who were fond of tracing their books to some
recondite source. In working out the new ideas, he soon found the value
of Sancho Panza. Indeed, the keynote, not only to Sancho's part, but to
the whole book, is struck in the first words Sancho utters when he
announces his intention of taking his ass with him. "About the ass," we
are told, "Don Quixote hesitated a little, trying whether he could call
to mind any knight-errant taking with him an esquire mounted on ass-back;
but no instance occurred to his memory." We can see the whole scene at a
glance, the stolid unconsciousness of Sancho and the perplexity of his
master, upon whose perception the incongruity has just forced itself.
This is Sancho's mission throughout the book; he is an unconscious
Mephistopheles, always unwittingly making mockery of his master's
aspirations, always exposing the fallacy of his ideas by some
unintentional ad absurdum, always bringing him back to the world of fact
and commonplace by force of sheer stolidity.

By the time Cervantes had got his volume of novels off his hands, and
summoned up resolution enough to set about the Second Part in earnest,
the case was very much altered. Don Quixote and Sancho Panza had not
merely found favour, but had already become, what they have never since
ceased to be, veritable entities to the popular imagination. There was no
occasion for him now to interpolate extraneous matter; nay, his readers
told him plainly that what they wanted of him was more Don Quixote and
more Sancho Panza, and not novels, tales, or digressions. To himself,
too, his creations had become realities, and he had become proud of them,
especially of Sancho. He began the Second Part, therefore, under very
different conditions, and the difference makes itself manifest at once.
Even in translation the style will be seen to be far easier, more
flowing, more natural, and more like that of a man sure of himself and of
his audience. Don Quixote and Sancho undergo a change also. In the First
Part, Don Quixote has no character or individuality whatever. He is
nothing more than a crazy representative of the sentiments of the
chivalry romances. In all that he says and does he is simply repeating
the lesson he has learned from his books; and therefore, it is absurd to
speak of him in the gushing strain of the sentimental critics when they
dilate upon his nobleness, disinterestedness, dauntless courage, and so
forth. It was the business of a knight-errant to right wrongs, redress
injuries, and succour the distressed, and this, as a matter of course, he
makes his business when he takes up the part; a knight-errant was bound
to be intrepid, and so he feels bound to cast fear aside. Of all Byron's
melodious nonsense about Don Quixote, the most nonsensical statement is
that "'t is his virtue makes him mad!" The exact opposite is the truth;
it is his madness makes him virtuous.

In the Second Part, Cervantes repeatedly reminds the reader, as if it was
a point upon which he was anxious there should be no mistake, that his
hero's madness is strictly confined to delusions on the subject of
chivalry, and that on every other subject he is discreto, one, in fact,
whose faculty of discernment is in perfect order. The advantage of this
is that he is enabled to make use of Don Quixote as a mouthpiece for his
own reflections, and so, without seeming to digress, allow himself the
relief of digression when he requires it, as freely as in a commonplace
book.

It is true the amount of individuality bestowed upon Don Quixote is not
very great. There are some natural touches of character about him, such
as his mixture of irascibility and placability, and his curious affection
for Sancho together with his impatience of the squire's loquacity and
impertinence; but in the main, apart from his craze, he is little more
than a thoughtful, cultured gentleman, with instinctive good taste and a
great deal of shrewdness and originality of mind.

As to Sancho, it is plain, from the concluding words of the preface to
the First Part, that he was a favourite with his creator even before he
had been taken into favour by the public. An inferior genius, taking him
in hand a second time, would very likely have tried to improve him by
making him more comical, clever, amiable, or virtuous. But Cervantes was
too true an artist to spoil his work in this way. Sancho, when he
reappears, is the old Sancho with the old familiar features; but with a
difference; they have been brought out more distinctly, but at the same
time with a careful avoidance of anything like caricature; the outline
has been filled in where filling in was necessary, and, vivified by a few
touches of a master's hand, Sancho stands before us as he might in a
character portrait by Velazquez. He is a much more important and
prominent figure in the Second Part than in the First; indeed, it is his
matchless mendacity about Dulcinea that to a great extent supplies the
action of the story.

His development in this respect is as remarkable as in any other. In the
First Part he displays a great natural gift of lying. His lies are not of
the highly imaginative sort that liars in fiction commonly indulge in;
like Falstaff's, they resemble the father that begets them; they are
simple, homely, plump lies; plain working lies, in short. But in the
service of such a master as Don Quixote he develops rapidly, as we see
when he comes to palm off the three country wenches as Dulcinea and her
ladies in waiting. It is worth noticing how, flushed by his success in
this instance, he is tempted afterwards to try a flight beyond his powers
in his account of the journey on Clavileno.

In the Second Part it is the spirit rather than the incidents of the
chivalry romances that is the subject of the burlesque. Enchantments of
the sort travestied in those of Dulcinea and the Trifaldi and the cave of
Montesinos play a leading part in the later and inferior romances, and
another distinguishing feature is caricatured in Don Quixote's blind
adoration of Dulcinea. In the romances of chivalry love is either a mere
animalism or a fantastic idolatry. Only a coarse-minded man would care to
make merry with the former, but to one of Cervantes' humour the latter
was naturally an attractive subject for ridicule. Like everything else in
these romances, it is a gross exaggeration of the real sentiment of
chivalry, but its peculiar extravagance is probably due to the influence
of those masters of hyperbole, the Provencal poets. When a troubadour
professed his readiness to obey his lady in all things, he made it
incumbent upon the next comer, if he wished to avoid the imputation of
tameness and commonplace, to declare himself the slave of her will, which
the next was compelled to cap by some still stronger declaration; and so
expressions of devotion went on rising one above the other like biddings
at an auction, and a conventional language of gallantry and theory of
love came into being that in time permeated the literature of Southern
Europe, and bore fruit, in one direction in the transcendental worship of
Beatrice and Laura, and in another in the grotesque idolatry which found
exponents in writers like Feliciano de Silva. This is what Cervantes
deals with in Don Quixote's passion for Dulcinea, and in no instance has
he carried out the burlesque more happily. By keeping Dulcinea in the
background, and making her a vague shadowy being of whose very existence
we are left in doubt, he invests Don Quixote's worship of her virtues and
charms with an additional extravagance, and gives still more point to the
caricature of the sentiment and language of the romances.

One of the great merits of "Don Quixote," and one of the qualities that
have secured its acceptance by all classes of readers and made it the
most cosmopolitan of books, is its simplicity. There are, of course,
points obvious enough to a Spanish seventeenth century audience which do
not immediately strike a reader now-a-days, and Cervantes often takes it
for granted that an allusion will be generally understood which is only
intelligible to a few. For example, on many of his readers in Spain, and
most of his readers out of it, the significance of his choice of a
country for his hero is completely lost. It would be going too far to say
that no one can thoroughly comprehend "Don Quixote" without having seen
La Mancha, but undoubtedly even a glimpse of La Mancha will give an
insight into the meaning of Cervantes such as no commentator can give. Of
all the regions of Spain it is the last that would suggest the idea of
romance. Of all the dull central plateau of the Peninsula it is the
dullest tract. There is something impressive about the grim solitudes of
Estremadura; and if the plains of Leon and Old Castile are bald and
dreary, they are studded with old cities renowned in history and rich in
relics of the past. But there is no redeeming feature in the Manchegan
landscape; it has all the sameness of the desert without its dignity; the
few towns and villages that break its monotony are mean and commonplace,
there is nothing venerable about them, they have not even the
picturesqueness of poverty; indeed, Don Quixote's own village,
Argamasilla, has a sort of oppressive respectability in the prim
regularity of its streets and houses; everything is ignoble; the very
windmills are the ugliest and shabbiest of the windmill kind.

To anyone who knew the country well, the mere style and title of "Don
Quixote of La Mancha" gave the key to the author's meaning at once. La
Mancha as the knight's country and scene of his chivalries is of a piece
with the pasteboard helmet, the farm-labourer on ass-back for a squire,
knighthood conferred by a rascally ventero, convicts taken for victims of
oppression, and the rest of the incongruities between Don Quixote's world
and the world he lived in, between things as he saw them and things as
they were.

It is strange that this element of incongruity, underlying the whole
humour and purpose of the book, should have been so little heeded by the
majority of those who have undertaken to interpret "Don Quixote." It has
been completely overlooked, for example, by the illustrators. To be sure,
the great majority of the artists who illustrated "Don Quixote" knew
nothing whatever of Spain. To them a venta conveyed no idea but the
abstract one of a roadside inn, and they could not therefore do full
justice to the humour of Don Quixote's misconception in taking it for a
castle, or perceive the remoteness of all its realities from his ideal.
But even when better informed they seem to have no apprehension of the
full force of the discrepancy. Take, for instance, Gustave Dore's drawing
of Don Quixote watching his armour in the inn-yard. Whether or not the
Venta de Quesada on the Seville road is, as tradition maintains, the inn
described in "Don Quixote," beyond all question it was just such an
inn-yard as the one behind it that Cervantes had in his mind's eye, and
it was on just such a rude stone trough as that beside the primitive
draw-well in the corner that he meant Don Quixote to deposit his armour.
Gustave Dore makes it an elaborate fountain such as no arriero ever
watered his mules at in the corral of any venta in Spain, and thereby
entirely misses the point aimed at by Cervantes. It is the mean, prosaic,
commonplace character of all the surroundings and circumstances that
gives a significance to Don Quixote's vigil and the ceremony that
follows.

Cervantes' humour is for the most part of that broader and simpler sort,
the strength of which lies in the perception of the incongruous. It is
the incongruity of Sancho in all his ways, words, and works, with the
ideas and aims of his master, quite as much as the wonderful vitality and
truth to nature of the character, that makes him the most humorous
creation in the whole range of fiction. That unsmiling gravity of which
Cervantes was the first great master, "Cervantes' serious air," which
sits naturally on Swift alone, perhaps, of later humourists, is essential
to this kind of humour, and here again Cervantes has suffered at the
hands of his interpreters. Nothing, unless indeed the coarse buffoonery
of Phillips, could be more out of place in an attempt to represent
Cervantes, than a flippant, would-be facetious style, like that of
Motteux's version for example, or the sprightly, jaunty air, French
translators sometimes adopt. It is the grave matter-of-factness of the
narrative, and the apparent unconsciousness of the author that he is
saying anything ludicrous, anything but the merest commonplace, that give
its peculiar flavour to the humour of Cervantes. His, in fact, is the
exact opposite of the humour of Sterne and the self-conscious humourists.
Even when Uncle Toby is at his best, you are always aware of "the man
Sterne" behind him, watching you over his shoulder to see what effect he
is producing. Cervantes always leaves you alone with Don Quixote and
Sancho. He and Swift and the great humourists always keep themselves out
of sight, or, more properly speaking, never think about themselves at
all, unlike our latter-day school of humourists, who seem to have revived
the old horse-collar method, and try to raise a laugh by some grotesque
assumption of ignorance, imbecility, or bad taste.

It is true that to do full justice to Spanish humour in any other
language is well-nigh an impossibility. There is a natural gravity and a
sonorous stateliness about Spanish, be it ever so colloquial, that make
an absurdity doubly absurd, and give plausibility to the most
preposterous statement. This is what makes Sancho Panza's drollery the
despair of the conscientious translator. Sancho's curt comments can never
fall flat, but they lose half their flavour when transferred from their
native Castilian into any other medium. But if foreigners have failed to
do justice to the humour of Cervantes, they are no worse than his own
countrymen. Indeed, were it not for the Spanish peasant's relish of "Don
Quixote," one might be tempted to think that the great humourist was not
looked upon as a humourist at all in his own country.

The craze of Don Quixote seems, in some instances, to have communicated
itself to his critics, making them see things that are not in the book
and run full tilt at phantoms that have no existence save in their own
imaginations. Like a good many critics now-a-days, they forget that
screams are not criticism, and that it is only vulgar tastes that are
influenced by strings of superlatives, three-piled hyperboles, and
pompous epithets. But what strikes one as particularly strange is that
while they deal in extravagant eulogies, and ascribe all manner of
imaginary ideas and qualities to Cervantes, they show no perception of
the quality that ninety-nine out of a hundred of his readers would rate
highest in him, and hold to be the one that raises him above all rivalry.

To speak of "Don Quixote" as if it were merely a humorous book would be a
manifest misdescription. Cervantes at times makes it a kind of
commonplace book for occasional essays and criticisms, or for the
observations and reflections and gathered wisdom of a long and stirring
life. It is a mine of shrewd observation on mankind and human nature.
Among modern novels there may be, here and there, more elaborate studies
of character, but there is no book richer in individualised character.
What Coleridge said of Shakespeare in minimis is true of Cervantes; he
never, even for the most temporary purpose, puts forward a lay figure.
There is life and individuality in all his characters, however little
they may have to do, or however short a time they may be before the
reader. Samson Carrasco, the curate, Teresa Panza, Altisidora, even the
two students met on the road to the cave of Montesinos, all live and move
and have their being; and it is characteristic of the broad humanity of
Cervantes that there is not a hateful one among them all. Even poor
Maritornes, with her deplorable morals, has a kind heart of her own and
"some faint and distant resemblance to a Christian about her;" and as for
Sancho, though on dissection we fail to find a lovable trait in him,
unless it be a sort of dog-like affection for his master, who is there
that in his heart does not love him?

But it is, after all, the humour of "Don Quixote" that distinguishes it
from all other books of the romance kind. It is this that makes it, as
one of the most judicial-minded of modern critics calls it, "the best
novel in the world beyond all comparison." It is its varied humour,
ranging from broad farce to comedy as subtle as Shakespeare's or
Moliere's that has naturalised it in every country where there are
readers, and made it a classic in every language that has a literature.

SOME COMMENDATORY VERSES


URGANDA THE UNKNOWN

To the book of Don Quixote of la Mancha

 If to be welcomed by the good,
   O Book! thou make thy steady aim,
 No empty chatterer will dare
   To question or dispute thy claim.
 But if perchance thou hast a mind
   To win of idiots approbation,
 Lost labour will be thy reward,
   Though they'll pretend appreciation.

 They say a goodly shade he finds
   Who shelters 'neath a goodly tree;
 And such a one thy kindly star
   In Bejar bath provided thee:
 A royal tree whose spreading boughs
   A show of princely fruit display;
 A tree that bears a noble Duke,
   The Alexander of his day.

 Of a Manchegan gentleman
   Thy purpose is to tell the story,
 Relating how he lost his wits
   O'er idle tales of love and glory,
 Of "ladies, arms, and cavaliers:"
   A new Orlando Furioso-
 Innamorato, rather--who
   Won Dulcinea del Toboso.

 Put no vain emblems on thy shield;
   All figures--that is bragging play.
 A modest dedication make,
   And give no scoffer room to say,
 "What! Alvaro de Luna here?
   Or is it Hannibal again?
 Or does King Francis at Madrid
   Once more of destiny complain?"

 Since Heaven it hath not pleased on thee
   Deep erudition to bestow,
 Or black Latino's gift of tongues,
   No Latin let thy pages show.
 Ape not philosophy or wit,
   Lest one who cannot comprehend,
 Make a wry face at thee and ask,
   "Why offer flowers to me, my friend?"

 Be not a meddler; no affair
   Of thine the life thy neighbours lead:
 Be prudent; oft the random jest
   Recoils upon the jester's head.
 Thy constant labour let it be
   To earn thyself an honest name,
 For fooleries preserved in print
   Are perpetuity of shame.

 A further counsel bear in mind:
   If that thy roof be made of glass,
 It shows small wit to pick up stones
   To pelt the people as they pass.
 Win the attention of the wise,
   And give the thinker food for thought;
 Whoso indites frivolities,
   Will but by simpletons be sought.




             AMADIS OF GAUL
       To Don Quixote of la Mancha

SONNET

 Thou that didst imitate that life of mine
   When I in lonely sadness on the great
   Rock Pena Pobre sat disconsolate,
 In self-imposed penance there to pine;
 Thou, whose sole beverage was the bitter brine
   Of thine own tears, and who withouten plate
   Of silver, copper, tin, in lowly state
 Off the bare earth and on earth's fruits didst dine;
 Live thou, of thine eternal glory sure.
   So long as on the round of the fourth sphere
   The bright Apollo shall his coursers steer,
 In thy renown thou shalt remain secure,
 Thy country's name in story shall endure,
   And thy sage author stand without a peer.




DON BELIANIS OF GREECE
To Don Quixote of la Mancha

SONNET

 In slashing, hewing, cleaving, word and deed,
   I was the foremost knight of chivalry,
   Stout, bold, expert, as e'er the world did see;
 Thousands from the oppressor's wrong I freed;
 Great were my feats, eternal fame their meed;
   In love I proved my truth and loyalty;
   The hugest giant was a dwarf for me;
 Ever to knighthood's laws gave I good heed.
 My mastery the Fickle Goddess owned,
   And even Chance, submitting to control,
     Grasped by the forelock, yielded to my will.
 Yet--though above yon horned moon enthroned
     My fortune seems to sit--great Quixote, still
   Envy of thy achievements fills my soul.




THE LADY OF ORIANA
To Dulcinea del Toboso

SONNET

 Oh, fairest Dulcinea, could it be!
   It were a pleasant fancy to suppose so--
   Could Miraflores change to El Toboso,
 And London's town to that which shelters thee!
 Oh, could mine but acquire that livery
   Of countless charms thy mind and body show so!
   Or him, now famous grown--thou mad'st him grow so--
 Thy knight, in some dread combat could I see!
 Oh, could I be released from Amadis
   By exercise of such coy chastity
 As led thee gentle Quixote to dismiss!
     Then would my heavy sorrow turn to joy;
   None would I envy, all would envy me,
     And happiness be mine without alloy.

GANDALIN, SQUIRE OF AMADIS OF GAUL,
To Sancho Panza, squire of Don Quixote

SONNET

 All hail, illustrious man! Fortune, when she
   Bound thee apprentice to the esquire trade,
   Her care and tenderness of thee displayed,
 Shaping thy course from misadventure free.
 No longer now doth proud knight-errantry
   Regard with scorn the sickle and the spade;
   Of towering arrogance less count is made
 Than of plain esquire-like simplicity.
 I envy thee thy Dapple, and thy name,
   And those alforjas thou wast wont to stuff
 With comforts that thy providence proclaim.
     Excellent Sancho! hail to thee again!
     To thee alone the Ovid of our Spain
   Does homage with the rustic kiss and cuff.




   FROM EL DONOSO, THE MOTLEY POET,

On Sancho Panza and Rocinante

ON SANCHO

I am the esquire Sancho Pan--
Who served Don Quixote of La Man--;
But from his service I retreat-,
Resolved to pass my life discreet-;
For Villadiego, called the Si--,
Maintained that only in reti--
Was found the secret of well-be--,
According to the "Celesti--:"
A book divine, except for sin--
By speech too plain, in my opin--

ON ROCINANTE

I am that Rocinante fa--,
Great-grandson of great Babie--,
Who, all for being lean and bon--,
Had one Don Quixote for an own--;
But if I matched him well in weak--,
I never took short commons meek--,
But kept myself in corn by steal--,
A trick I learned from Lazaril--,
When with a piece of straw so neat--
The blind man of his wine he cheat--.

ORLANDO FURIOSO
To Don Quixote of La Mancha

SONNET

 If thou art not a Peer, peer thou hast none;
   Among a thousand Peers thou art a peer;
   Nor is there room for one when thou art near,
 Unvanquished victor, great unconquered one!
 Orlando, by Angelica undone,
   Am I; o'er distant seas condemned to steer,
   And to Fame's altars as an offering bear
 Valour respected by Oblivion.
 I cannot be thy rival, for thy fame
   And prowess rise above all rivalry,
     Albeit both bereft of wits we go.
 But, though the Scythian or the Moor to tame
   Was not thy lot, still thou dost rival me:
    Love binds us in a fellowship of woe.




THE KNIGHT OF PHOEBUS

To Don Quixote of La Mancha

 My sword was not to be compared with thine
   Phoebus of Spain, marvel of courtesy,
 Nor with thy famous arm this hand of mine
   That smote from east to west as lightnings fly.
   I scorned all empire, and that monarchy
 The rosy east held out did I resign
   For one glance of Claridiana's eye,
 The bright Aurora for whose love I pine.
 A miracle of constancy my love;
   And banished by her ruthless cruelty,
     This arm had might the rage of Hell to tame.
 But, Gothic Quixote, happier thou dost prove,
     For thou dost live in Dulcinea's name,
   And famous, honoured, wise, she lives in thee.




FROM SOLISDAN
To Don Quixote of La Mancha

SONNET

 Your fantasies, Sir Quixote, it is true,
   That crazy brain of yours have quite upset,
   But aught of base or mean hath never yet
 Been charged by any in reproach to you.
 Your deeds are open proof in all men's view;
   For you went forth injustice to abate,
   And for your pains sore drubbings did you get
 From many a rascally and ruffian crew.
 If the fair Dulcinea, your heart's queen,
   Be unrelenting in her cruelty,
     If still your woe be powerless to move her,
   In such hard case your comfort let it be
 That Sancho was a sorry go-between:
     A booby he, hard-hearted she, and you no lover.

DIALOGUE
Between Babieca and Rocinante

SONNET

B.  "How comes it, Rocinante, you're so lean?"
R.  "I'm underfed, with overwork I'm worn."
B.  "But what becomes of all the hay and corn?"
R.  "My master gives me none; he's much too mean."
B.  "Come, come, you show ill-breeding, sir, I ween;
  'T is like an ass your master thus to scorn."
R.  He is an ass, will die an ass, an ass was born;
  Why, he's in love; what's what's plainer to be seen?"
B.  "To be in love is folly?"--R. "No great sense."
B.  "You're metaphysical."--R. "From want of food."
B.  "Rail at the squire, then."--R. "Why, what's the good?
    I might indeed complain of him, I grant ye,
  But, squire or master, where's the difference?
    They're both as sorry hacks as Rocinante."




THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE

Idle reader: thou mayest believe me without any oath that I would this
book, as it is the child of my brain, were the fairest, gayest, and
cleverest that could be imagined. But I could not counteract Nature's law
that everything shall beget its like; and what, then, could this sterile,
illtilled wit of mine beget but the story of a dry, shrivelled, whimsical
offspring, full of thoughts of all sorts and such as never came into any
other imagination--just what might be begotten in a prison, where every
misery is lodged and every doleful sound makes its dwelling?
Tranquillity, a cheerful retreat, pleasant fields, bright skies,
murmuring brooks, peace of mind, these are the things that go far to make
even the most barren muses fertile, and bring into the world births that
fill it with wonder and delight. Sometimes when a father has an ugly,
loutish son, the love he bears him so blindfolds his eyes that he does
not see his defects, or, rather, takes them for gifts and charms of mind
and body, and talks of them to his friends as wit and grace. I,
however--for though I pass for the father, I am but the stepfather to
"Don Quixote"--have no desire to go with the current of custom, or to
implore thee, dearest reader, almost with tears in my eyes, as others do,
to pardon or excuse the defects thou wilt perceive in this child of mine.
Thou art neither its kinsman nor its friend, thy soul is thine own and
thy will as free as any man's, whate'er he be, thou art in thine own
house and master of it as much as the king of his taxes and thou knowest
the common saying, "Under my cloak I kill the king;" all which exempts
and frees thee from every consideration and obligation, and thou canst
say what thou wilt of the story without fear of being abused for any ill
or rewarded for any good thou mayest say of it.

My wish would be simply to present it to thee plain and unadorned,
without any embellishment of preface or uncountable muster of customary
sonnets, epigrams, and eulogies, such as are commonly put at the
beginning of books. For I can tell thee, though composing it cost me some
labour, I found none greater than the making of this Preface thou art now
reading. Many times did I take up my pen to write it, and many did I lay
it down again, not knowing what to write. One of these times, as I was
pondering with the paper before me, a pen in my ear, my elbow on the
desk, and my cheek in my hand, thinking of what I should say, there came
in unexpectedly a certain lively, clever friend of mine, who, seeing me
so deep in thought, asked the reason; to which I, making no mystery of
it, answered that I was thinking of the Preface I had to make for the
story of "Don Quixote," which so troubled me that I had a mind not to
make any at all, nor even publish the achievements of so noble a knight.

"For, how could you expect me not to feel uneasy about what that ancient
lawgiver they call the Public will say when it sees me, after slumbering
so many years in the silence of oblivion, coming out now with all my
years upon my back, and with a book as dry as a rush, devoid of
invention, meagre in style, poor in thoughts, wholly wanting in learning
and wisdom, without quotations in the margin or annotations at the end,
after the fashion of other books I see, which, though all fables and
profanity, are so full of maxims from Aristotle, and Plato, and the whole
herd of philosophers, that they fill the readers with amazement and
convince them that the authors are men of learning, erudition, and
eloquence. And then, when they quote the Holy Scriptures!--anyone would
say they are St. Thomases or other doctors of the Church, observing as
they do a decorum so ingenious that in one sentence they describe a
distracted lover and in the next deliver a devout little sermon that it
is a pleasure and a treat to hear and read. Of all this there will be
nothing in my book, for I have nothing to quote in the margin or to note
at the end, and still less do I know what authors I follow in it, to
place them at the beginning, as all do, under the letters A, B, C,
beginning with Aristotle and ending with Xenophon, or Zoilus, or Zeuxis,
though one was a slanderer and the other a painter. Also my book must do
without sonnets at the beginning, at least sonnets whose authors are
dukes, marquises, counts, bishops, ladies, or famous poets. Though if I
were to ask two or three obliging friends, I know they would give me
them, and such as the productions of those that have the highest
reputation in our Spain could not equal.

"In short, my friend," I continued, "I am determined that Senor Don
Quixote shall remain buried in the archives of his own La Mancha until
Heaven provide some one to garnish him with all those things he stands in
need of; because I find myself, through my shallowness and want of
learning, unequal to supplying them, and because I am by nature shy and
careless about hunting for authors to say what I myself can say without
them. Hence the cogitation and abstraction you found me in, and reason
enough, what you have heard from me."

Hearing this, my friend, giving himself a slap on the forehead and
breaking into a hearty laugh, exclaimed, "Before God, Brother, now am I
disabused of an error in which I have been living all this long time I
have known you, all through which I have taken you to be shrewd and
sensible in all you do; but now I see you are as far from that as the
heaven is from the earth. It is possible that things of so little moment
and so easy to set right can occupy and perplex a ripe wit like yours,
fit to break through and crush far greater obstacles? By my faith, this
comes, not of any want of ability, but of too much indolence and too
little knowledge of life. Do you want to know if I am telling the truth?
Well, then, attend to me, and you will see how, in the opening and
shutting of an eye, I sweep away all your difficulties, and supply all
those deficiencies which you say check and discourage you from bringing
before the world the story of your famous Don Quixote, the light and
mirror of all knight-errantry."

"Say on," said I, listening to his talk; "how do you propose to make up
for my diffidence, and reduce to order this chaos of perplexity I am in?"

To which he made answer, "Your first difficulty about the sonnets,
epigrams, or complimentary verses which you want for the beginning, and
which ought to be by persons of importance and rank, can be removed if
you yourself take a little trouble to make them; you can afterwards
baptise them, and put any name you like to them, fathering them on
Prester John of the Indies or the Emperor of Trebizond, who, to my
knowledge, were said to have been famous poets: and even if they were
not, and any pedants or bachelors should attack you and question the
fact, never care two maravedis for that, for even if they prove a lie
against you they cannot cut off the hand you wrote it with.

"As to references in the margin to the books and authors from whom you
take the aphorisms and sayings you put into your story, it is only
contriving to fit in nicely any sentences or scraps of Latin you may
happen to have by heart, or at any rate that will not give you much
trouble to look up; so as, when you speak of freedom and captivity, to
insert

_Non bene pro toto libertas venditur auro;_

and then refer in the margin to Horace, or whoever said it; or, if you
allude to the power of death, to come in with--

_Pallida mors Aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,
Regumque turres._

"If it be friendship and the love God bids us bear to our enemy, go at
once to the Holy Scriptures, which you can do with a very small amount of
research, and quote no less than the words of God himself: Ego autem dico
vobis: diligite inimicos vestros. If you speak of evil thoughts, turn to
the Gospel: De corde exeunt cogitationes malae. If of the fickleness of
friends, there is Cato, who will give you his distich:

_Donec eris felix multos numerabis amicos,
Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris._

"With these and such like bits of Latin they will take you for a
grammarian at all events, and that now-a-days is no small honour and
profit.

"With regard to adding annotations at the end of the book, you may safely
do it in this way. If you mention any giant in your book contrive that it
shall be the giant Goliath, and with this alone, which will cost you
almost nothing, you have a grand note, for you can put--The giant Golias
or Goliath was a Philistine whom the shepherd David slew by a mighty
stone-cast in the Terebinth valley, as is related in the Book of
Kings--in the chapter where you find it written.

"Next, to prove yourself a man of erudition in polite literature and
cosmography, manage that the river Tagus shall be named in your story,
and there you are at once with another famous annotation, setting
forth--The river Tagus was so called after a King of Spain: it has its
source in such and such a place and falls into the ocean, kissing the
walls of the famous city of Lisbon, and it is a common belief that it has
golden sands, etc. If you should have anything to do with robbers, I will
give you the story of Cacus, for I have it by heart; if with loose women,
there is the Bishop of Mondonedo, who will give you the loan of Lamia,
Laida, and Flora, any reference to whom will bring you great credit; if
with hard-hearted ones, Ovid will furnish you with Medea; if with witches
or enchantresses, Homer has Calypso, and Virgil Circe; if with valiant
captains, Julius Caesar himself will lend you himself in his own
'Commentaries,' and Plutarch will give you a thousand Alexanders. If you
should deal with love, with two ounces you may know of Tuscan you can go
to Leon the Hebrew, who will supply you to your heart's content; or if
you should not care to go to foreign countries you have at home Fonseca's
'Of the Love of God,' in which is condensed all that you or the most
imaginative mind can want on the subject. In short, all you have to do is
to manage to quote these names, or refer to these stories I have
mentioned, and leave it to me to insert the annotations and quotations,
and I swear by all that's good to fill your margins and use up four
sheets at the end of the book.

"Now let us come to those references to authors which other books have,
and you want for yours. The remedy for this is very simple: You have only
to look out for some book that quotes them all, from A to Z as you say
yourself, and then insert the very same alphabet in your book, and though
the imposition may be plain to see, because you have so little need to
borrow from them, that is no matter; there will probably be some simple
enough to believe that you have made use of them all in this plain,
artless story of yours. At any rate, if it answers no other purpose, this
long catalogue of authors will serve to give a surprising look of
authority to your book. Besides, no one will trouble himself to verify
whether you have followed them or whether you have not, being no way
concerned in it; especially as, if I mistake not, this book of yours has
no need of any one of those things you say it wants, for it is, from
beginning to end, an attack upon the books of chivalry, of which
Aristotle never dreamt, nor St. Basil said a word, nor Cicero had any
knowledge; nor do the niceties of truth nor the observations of astrology
come within the range of its fanciful vagaries; nor have geometrical
measurements or refutations of the arguments used in rhetoric anything to
do with it; nor does it mean to preach to anybody, mixing up things human
and divine, a sort of motley in which no Christian understanding should
dress itself. It has only to avail itself of truth to nature in its
composition, and the more perfect the imitation the better the work will
be. And as this piece of yours aims at nothing more than to destroy the
authority and influence which books of chivalry have in the world and
with the public, there is no need for you to go a-begging for aphorisms
from philosophers, precepts from Holy Scripture, fables from poets,
speeches from orators, or miracles from saints; but merely to take care
that your style and diction run musically, pleasantly, and plainly, with
clear, proper, and well-placed words, setting forth your purpose to the
best of your power, and putting your ideas intelligibly, without
confusion or obscurity. Strive, too, that in reading your story the
melancholy may be moved to laughter, and the merry made merrier still;
that the simple shall not be wearied, that the judicious shall admire the
invention, that the grave shall not despise it, nor the wise fail to
praise it. Finally, keep your aim fixed on the destruction of that
ill-founded edifice of the books of chivalry, hated by some and praised
by many more; for if you succeed in this you will have achieved no small
success."

In profound silence I listened to what my friend said, and his
observations made such an impression on me that, without attempting to
question them, I admitted their soundness, and out of them I determined
to make this Preface; wherein, gentle reader, thou wilt perceive my
friend's good sense, my good fortune in finding such an adviser in such a
time of need, and what thou hast gained in receiving, without addition or
alteration, the story of the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha, who is held
by all the inhabitants of the district of the Campo de Montiel to have
been the chastest lover and the bravest knight that has for many years
been seen in that neighbourhood. I have no desire to magnify the service
I render thee in making thee acquainted with so renowned and honoured a
knight, but I do desire thy thanks for the acquaintance thou wilt make
with the famous Sancho Panza, his squire, in whom, to my thinking, I have
given thee condensed all the squirely drolleries that are scattered
through the swarm of the vain books of chivalry. And so--may God give
thee health, and not forget me. Vale.




DEDICATION OF PART I

TO THE DUKE OF BEJAR, MARQUIS OF GIBRALEON, COUNT OF BENALCAZAR AND
BANARES, VICECOUNT OF THE PUEBLA DE ALCOCER, MASTER OF THE TOWNS OF
CAPILLA, CURIEL AND BURGUILLOS

In belief of the good reception and honours that Your Excellency bestows
on all sort of books, as prince so inclined to favor good arts, chiefly
those who by their nobleness do not submit to the service and bribery of
the vulgar, I have determined bringing to light The Ingenious Gentleman
Don Quixote of la Mancha, in shelter of Your Excellency's glamorous name,
to whom, with the obeisance I owe to such grandeur, I pray to receive it
agreeably under his protection, so that in this shadow, though deprived
of that precious ornament of elegance and erudition that clothe the works
composed in the houses of those who know, it dares appear with assurance
in the judgment of some who, trespassing the bounds of their own
ignorance, use to condemn with more rigour and less justice the writings
of others. It is my earnest hope that Your Excellency's good counsel in
regard to my honourable purpose, will not disdain the littleness of so
humble a service.

Miguel de Cervantes




CHAPTER I.

WHICH TREATS OF THE CHARACTER AND PURSUITS OF THE FAMOUS GENTLEMAN DON
QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA


In a village of La Mancha, the name of which I have no desire to call to
mind, there lived not long since one of those gentlemen that keep a lance
in the lance-rack, an old buckler, a lean hack, and a greyhound for
coursing. An olla of rather more beef than mutton, a salad on most
nights, scraps on Saturdays, lentils on Fridays, and a pigeon or so extra
on Sundays, made away with three-quarters of his income. The rest of it
went in a doublet of fine cloth and velvet breeches and shoes to match
for holidays, while on week-days he made a brave figure in his best
homespun. He had in his house a housekeeper past forty, a niece under
twenty, and a lad for the field and market-place, who used to saddle the
hack as well as handle the bill-hook. The age of this gentleman of ours
was bordering on fifty; he was of a hardy habit, spare, gaunt-featured, a
very early riser and a great sportsman. They will have it his surname was
Quixada or Quesada (for here there is some difference of opinion among
the authors who write on the subject), although from reasonable
conjectures it seems plain that he was called Quexana. This, however, is
of but little importance to our tale; it will be enough not to stray a
hair's breadth from the truth in the telling of it.

You must know, then, that the above-named gentleman whenever he was at
leisure (which was mostly all the year round) gave himself up to reading
books of chivalry with such ardour and avidity that he almost entirely
neglected the pursuit of his field-sports, and even the management of his
property; and to such a pitch did his eagerness and infatuation go that
he sold many an acre of tillageland to buy books of chivalry to read, and
brought home as many of them as he could get. But of all there were none
he liked so well as those of the famous Feliciano de Silva's composition,
for their lucidity of style and complicated conceits were as pearls in
his sight, particularly when in his reading he came upon courtships and
cartels, where he often found passages like "the reason of the unreason
with which my reason is afflicted so weakens my reason that with reason I
murmur at your beauty;" or again, "the high heavens, that of your
divinity divinely fortify you with the stars, render you deserving of the
desert your greatness deserves." Over conceits of this sort the poor
gentleman lost his wits, and used to lie awake striving to understand
them and worm the meaning out of them; what Aristotle himself could not
have made out or extracted had he come to life again for that special
purpose. He was not at all easy about the wounds which Don Belianis gave
and took, because it seemed to him that, great as were the surgeons who
had cured him, he must have had his face and body covered all over with
seams and scars. He commended, however, the author's way of ending his
book with the promise of that interminable adventure, and many a time was
he tempted to take up his pen and finish it properly as is there
proposed, which no doubt he would have done, and made a successful piece
of work of it too, had not greater and more absorbing thoughts prevented
him.

Many an argument did he have with the curate of his village (a learned
man, and a graduate of Siguenza) as to which had been the better knight,
Palmerin of England or Amadis of Gaul. Master Nicholas, the village
barber, however, used to say that neither of them came up to the Knight
of Phoebus, and that if there was any that could compare with him it was
Don Galaor, the brother of Amadis of Gaul, because he had a spirit that
was equal to every occasion, and was no finikin knight, nor lachrymose
like his brother, while in the matter of valour he was not a whit behind
him. In short, he became so absorbed in his books that he spent his
nights from sunset to sunrise, and his days from dawn to dark, poring
over them; and what with little sleep and much reading his brains got so
dry that he lost his wits. His fancy grew full of what he used to read
about in his books, enchantments, quarrels, battles, challenges, wounds,
wooings, loves, agonies, and all sorts of impossible nonsense; and it so
possessed his mind that the whole fabric of invention and fancy he read
of was true, that to him no history in the world had more reality in it.
He used to say the Cid Ruy Diaz was a very good knight, but that he was
not to be compared with the Knight of the Burning Sword who with one
back-stroke cut in half two fierce and monstrous giants. He thought more
of Bernardo del Carpio because at Roncesvalles he slew Roland in spite of
enchantments, availing himself of the artifice of Hercules when he
strangled Antaeus the son of Terra in his arms. He approved highly of the
giant Morgante, because, although of the giant breed which is always
arrogant and ill-conditioned, he alone was affable and well-bred. But
above all he admired Reinaldos of Montalban, especially when he saw him
sallying forth from his castle and robbing everyone he met, and when
beyond the seas he stole that image of Mahomet which, as his history
says, was entirely of gold. To have a bout of kicking at that traitor of
a Ganelon he would have given his housekeeper, and his niece into the
bargain.

In short, his wits being quite gone, he hit upon the strangest notion
that ever madman in this world hit upon, and that was that he fancied it
was right and requisite, as well for the support of his own honour as for
the service of his country, that he should make a knight-errant of
himself, roaming the world over in full armour and on horseback in quest
of adventures, and putting in practice himself all that he had read of as
being the usual practices of knights-errant; righting every kind of
wrong, and exposing himself to peril and danger from which, in the issue,
he was to reap eternal renown and fame. Already the poor man saw himself
crowned by the might of his arm Emperor of Trebizond at least; and so,
led away by the intense enjoyment he found in these pleasant fancies, he
set himself forthwith to put his scheme into execution.

The first thing he did was to clean up some armour that had belonged to
his great-grandfather, and had been for ages lying forgotten in a corner
eaten with rust and covered with mildew. He scoured and polished it as
best he could, but he perceived one great defect in it, that it had no
closed helmet, nothing but a simple morion. This deficiency, however, his
ingenuity supplied, for he contrived a kind of half-helmet of pasteboard
which, fitted on to the morion, looked like a whole one. It is true that,
in order to see if it was strong and fit to stand a cut, he drew his
sword and gave it a couple of slashes, the first of which undid in an
instant what had taken him a week to do. The ease with which he had
knocked it to pieces disconcerted him somewhat, and to guard against that
danger he set to work again, fixing bars of iron on the inside until he
was satisfied with its strength; and then, not caring to try any more
experiments with it, he passed it and adopted it as a helmet of the most
perfect construction.

He next proceeded to inspect his hack, which, with more quartos than a
real and more blemishes than the steed of Gonela, that "tantum pellis et
ossa fuit," surpassed in his eyes the Bucephalus of Alexander or the
Babieca of the Cid. Four days were spent in thinking what name to give
him, because (as he said to himself) it was not right that a horse
belonging to a knight so famous, and one with such merits of his own,
should be without some distinctive name, and he strove to adapt it so as
to indicate what he had been before belonging to a knight-errant, and
what he then was; for it was only reasonable that, his master taking a
new character, he should take a new name, and that it should be a
distinguished and full-sounding one, befitting the new order and calling
he was about to follow. And so, after having composed, struck out,
rejected, added to, unmade, and remade a multitude of names out of his
memory and fancy, he decided upon calling him Rocinante, a name, to his
thinking, lofty, sonorous, and significant of his condition as a hack
before he became what he now was, the first and foremost of all the hacks
in the world.

Having got a name for his horse so much to his taste, he was anxious to
get one for himself, and he was eight days more pondering over this
point, till at last he made up his mind to call himself "Don Quixote,"
whence, as has been already said, the authors of this veracious history
have inferred that his name must have been beyond a doubt Quixada, and
not Quesada as others would have it. Recollecting, however, that the
valiant Amadis was not content to call himself curtly Amadis and nothing
more, but added the name of his kingdom and country to make it famous,
and called himself Amadis of Gaul, he, like a good knight, resolved to
add on the name of his, and to style himself Don Quixote of La Mancha,
whereby, he considered, he described accurately his origin and country,
and did honour to it in taking his surname from it.

So then, his armour being furbished, his morion turned into a helmet, his
hack christened, and he himself confirmed, he came to the conclusion that
nothing more was needed now but to look out for a lady to be in love
with; for a knight-errant without love was like a tree without leaves or
fruit, or a body without a soul. As he said to himself, "If, for my sins,
or by my good fortune, I come across some giant hereabouts, a common
occurrence with knights-errant, and overthrow him in one onslaught, or
cleave him asunder to the waist, or, in short, vanquish and subdue him,
will it not be well to have some one I may send him to as a present, that
he may come in and fall on his knees before my sweet lady, and in a
humble, submissive voice say, 'I am the giant Caraculiambro, lord of the
island of Malindrania, vanquished in single combat by the never
sufficiently extolled knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, who has commanded
me to present myself before your Grace, that your Highness dispose of me
at your pleasure'?" Oh, how our good gentleman enjoyed the delivery of
this speech, especially when he had thought of some one to call his Lady!
There was, so the story goes, in a village near his own a very
good-looking farm-girl with whom he had been at one time in love, though,
so far as is known, she never knew it nor gave a thought to the matter.
Her name was Aldonza Lorenzo, and upon her he thought fit to confer the
title of Lady of his Thoughts; and after some search for a name which
should not be out of harmony with her own, and should suggest and
indicate that of a princess and great lady, he decided upon calling her
Dulcinea del Toboso--she being of El Toboso--a name, to his mind,
musical, uncommon, and significant, like all those he had already
bestowed upon himself and the things belonging to him.




CHAPTER II.

WHICH TREATS OF THE FIRST SALLY THE INGENIOUS DON QUIXOTE MADE FROM HOME


These preliminaries settled, he did not care to put off any longer the
execution of his design, urged on to it by the thought of all the world
was losing by his delay, seeing what wrongs he intended to right,
grievances to redress, injustices to repair, abuses to remove, and duties
to discharge. So, without giving notice of his intention to anyone, and
without anybody seeing him, one morning before the dawning of the day
(which was one of the hottest of the month of July) he donned his suit of
armour, mounted Rocinante with his patched-up helmet on, braced his
buckler, took his lance, and by the back door of the yard sallied forth
upon the plain in the highest contentment and satisfaction at seeing with
what ease he had made a beginning with his grand purpose. But scarcely
did he find himself upon the open plain, when a terrible thought struck
him, one all but enough to make him abandon the enterprise at the very
outset. It occurred to him that he had not been dubbed a knight, and that
according to the law of chivalry he neither could nor ought to bear arms
against any knight; and that even if he had been, still he ought, as a
novice knight, to wear white armour, without a device upon the shield
until by his prowess he had earned one. These reflections made him waver
in his purpose, but his craze being stronger than any reasoning, he made
up his mind to have himself dubbed a knight by the first one he came
across, following the example of others in the same case, as he had read
in the books that brought him to this pass. As for white armour, he
resolved, on the first opportunity, to scour his until it was whiter than
an ermine; and so comforting himself he pursued his way, taking that
which his horse chose, for in this he believed lay the essence of
adventures.

Thus setting out, our new-fledged adventurer paced along, talking to
himself and saying, "Who knows but that in time to come, when the
veracious history of my famous deeds is made known, the sage who writes
it, when he has to set forth my first sally in the early morning, will do
it after this fashion? 'Scarce had the rubicund Apollo spread o'er the
face of the broad spacious earth the golden threads of his bright hair,
scarce had the little birds of painted plumage attuned their notes to
hail with dulcet and mellifluous harmony the coming of the rosy Dawn,
that, deserting the soft couch of her jealous spouse, was appearing to
mortals at the gates and balconies of the Manchegan horizon, when the
renowned knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, quitting the lazy down, mounted
his celebrated steed Rocinante and began to traverse the ancient and
famous Campo de Montiel;'" which in fact he was actually traversing.
"Happy the age, happy the time," he continued, "in which shall be made
known my deeds of fame, worthy to be moulded in brass, carved in marble,
limned in pictures, for a memorial for ever. And thou, O sage magician,
whoever thou art, to whom it shall fall to be the chronicler of this
wondrous history, forget not, I entreat thee, my good Rocinante, the
constant companion of my ways and wanderings." Presently he broke out
again, as if he were love-stricken in earnest, "O Princess Dulcinea, lady
of this captive heart, a grievous wrong hast thou done me to drive me
forth with scorn, and with inexorable obduracy banish me from the
presence of thy beauty. O lady, deign to hold in remembrance this heart,
thy vassal, that thus in anguish pines for love of thee."

So he went on stringing together these and other absurdities, all in the
style of those his books had taught him, imitating their language as well
as he could; and all the while he rode so slowly and the sun mounted so
rapidly and with such fervour that it was enough to melt his brains if he
had any. Nearly all day he travelled without anything remarkable
happening to him, at which he was in despair, for he was anxious to
encounter some one at once upon whom to try the might of his strong arm.

Writers there are who say the first adventure he met with was that of
Puerto Lapice; others say it was that of the windmills; but what I have
ascertained on this point, and what I have found written in the annals of
La Mancha, is that he was on the road all day, and towards nightfall his
hack and he found themselves dead tired and hungry, when, looking all
around to see if he could discover any castle or shepherd's shanty where
he might refresh himself and relieve his sore wants, he perceived not far
out of his road an inn, which was as welcome as a star guiding him to the
portals, if not the palaces, of his redemption; and quickening his pace
he reached it just as night was setting in. At the door were standing two
young women, girls of the district as they call them, on their way to
Seville with some carriers who had chanced to halt that night at the inn;
and as, happen what might to our adventurer, everything he saw or imaged
seemed to him to be and to happen after the fashion of what he read of,
the moment he saw the inn he pictured it to himself as a castle with its
four turrets and pinnacles of shining silver, not forgetting the
drawbridge and moat and all the belongings usually ascribed to castles of
the sort. To this inn, which to him seemed a castle, he advanced, and at
a short distance from it he checked Rocinante, hoping that some dwarf
would show himself upon the battlements, and by sound of trumpet give
notice that a knight was approaching the castle. But seeing that they
were slow about it, and that Rocinante was in a hurry to reach the
stable, he made for the inn door, and perceived the two gay damsels who
were standing there, and who seemed to him to be two fair maidens or
lovely ladies taking their ease at the castle gate.

At this moment it so happened that a swineherd who was going through the
stubbles collecting a drove of pigs (for, without any apology, that is
what they are called) gave a blast of his horn to bring them together,
and forthwith it seemed to Don Quixote to be what he was expecting, the
signal of some dwarf announcing his arrival; and so with prodigious
satisfaction he rode up to the inn and to the ladies, who, seeing a man
of this sort approaching in full armour and with lance and buckler, were
turning in dismay into the inn, when Don Quixote, guessing their fear by
their flight, raising his pasteboard visor, disclosed his dry dusty
visage, and with courteous bearing and gentle voice addressed them, "Your
ladyships need not fly or fear any rudeness, for that it belongs not to
the order of knighthood which I profess to offer to anyone, much less to
highborn maidens as your appearance proclaims you to be." The girls were
looking at him and straining their eyes to make out the features which
the clumsy visor obscured, but when they heard themselves called maidens,
a thing so much out of their line, they could not restrain their
laughter, which made Don Quixote wax indignant, and say, "Modesty becomes
the fair, and moreover laughter that has little cause is great silliness;
this, however, I say not to pain or anger you, for my desire is none
other than to serve you."

The incomprehensible language and the unpromising looks of our cavalier
only increased the ladies' laughter, and that increased his irritation,
and matters might have gone farther if at that moment the landlord had
not come out, who, being a very fat man, was a very peaceful one. He,
seeing this grotesque figure clad in armour that did not match any more
than his saddle, bridle, lance, buckler, or corselet, was not at all
indisposed to join the damsels in their manifestations of amusement; but,
in truth, standing in awe of such a complicated armament, he thought it
best to speak him fairly, so he said, "Senor Caballero, if your worship
wants lodging, bating the bed (for there is not one in the inn) there is
plenty of everything else here." Don Quixote, observing the respectful
bearing of the Alcaide of the fortress (for so innkeeper and inn seemed
in his eyes), made answer, "Sir Castellan, for me anything will suffice,
for

'My armour is my only wear,
My only rest the fray.'"

The host fancied he called him Castellan because he took him for a
"worthy of Castile," though he was in fact an Andalusian, and one from
the strand of San Lucar, as crafty a thief as Cacus and as full of tricks
as a student or a page. "In that case," said he,

"'Your bed is on the flinty rock,
Your sleep to watch alway;'

and if so, you may dismount and safely reckon upon any quantity of
sleeplessness under this roof for a twelvemonth, not to say for a single
night." So saying, he advanced to hold the stirrup for Don Quixote, who
got down with great difficulty and exertion (for he had not broken his
fast all day), and then charged the host to take great care of his horse,
as he was the best bit of flesh that ever ate bread in this world. The
landlord eyed him over but did not find him as good as Don Quixote said,
nor even half as good; and putting him up in the stable, he returned to
see what might be wanted by his guest, whom the damsels, who had by this
time made their peace with him, were now relieving of his armour. They
had taken off his breastplate and backpiece, but they neither knew nor
saw how to open his gorget or remove his make-shift helmet, for he had
fastened it with green ribbons, which, as there was no untying the knots,
required to be cut. This, however, he would not by any means consent to,
so he remained all the evening with his helmet on, the drollest and
oddest figure that can be imagined; and while they were removing his
armour, taking the baggages who were about it for ladies of high degree
belonging to the castle, he said to them with great sprightliness:

"Oh, never, surely, was there knight
  So served by hand of dame,
As served was he, Don Quixote hight,
  When from his town he came;
With maidens waiting on himself,
  Princesses on his hack--

or Rocinante, for that, ladies mine, is my horse's name, and Don Quixote
of La Mancha is my own; for though I had no intention of declaring myself
until my achievements in your service and honour had made me known, the
necessity of adapting that old ballad of Lancelot to the present occasion
has given you the knowledge of my name altogether prematurely. A time,
however, will come for your ladyships to command and me to obey, and then
the might of my arm will show my desire to serve you."

The girls, who were not used to hearing rhetoric of this sort, had
nothing to say in reply; they only asked him if he wanted anything to
eat. "I would gladly eat a bit of something," said Don Quixote, "for I
feel it would come very seasonably." The day happened to be a Friday, and
in the whole inn there was nothing but some pieces of the fish they call
in Castile "abadejo," in Andalusia "bacallao," and in some places
"curadillo," and in others "troutlet;" so they asked him if he thought he
could eat troutlet, for there was no other fish to give him. "If there be
troutlets enough," said Don Quixote, "they will be the same thing as a
trout; for it is all one to me whether I am given eight reals in small
change or a piece of eight; moreover, it may be that these troutlets are
like veal, which is better than beef, or kid, which is better than goat.
But whatever it be let it come quickly, for the burden and pressure of
arms cannot be borne without support to the inside." They laid a table
for him at the door of the inn for the sake of the air, and the host
brought him a portion of ill-soaked and worse cooked stockfish, and a
piece of bread as black and mouldy as his own armour; but a laughable
sight it was to see him eating, for having his helmet on and the beaver
up, he could not with his own hands put anything into his mouth unless
some one else placed it there, and this service one of the ladies
rendered him. But to give him anything to drink was impossible, or would
have been so had not the landlord bored a reed, and putting one end in
his mouth poured the wine into him through the other; all which he bore
with patience rather than sever the ribbons of his helmet.

While this was going on there came up to the inn a sowgelder, who, as he
approached, sounded his reed pipe four or five times, and thereby
completely convinced Don Quixote that he was in some famous castle, and
that they were regaling him with music, and that the stockfish was trout,
the bread the whitest, the wenches ladies, and the landlord the castellan
of the castle; and consequently he held that his enterprise and sally had
been to some purpose. But still it distressed him to think he had not
been dubbed a knight, for it was plain to him he could not lawfully
engage in any adventure without receiving the order of knighthood.




CHAPTER III.

WHEREIN IS RELATED THE DROLL WAY IN WHICH DON QUIXOTE HAD HIMSELF DUBBED
A KNIGHT


Harassed by this reflection, he made haste with his scanty pothouse
supper, and having finished it called the landlord, and shutting himself
into the stable with him, fell on his knees before him, saying, "From
this spot I rise not, valiant knight, until your courtesy grants me the
boon I seek, one that will redound to your praise and the benefit of the
human race." The landlord, seeing his guest at his feet and hearing a
speech of this kind, stood staring at him in bewilderment, not knowing
what to do or say, and entreating him to rise, but all to no purpose
until he had agreed to grant the boon demanded of him. "I looked for no
less, my lord, from your High Magnificence," replied Don Quixote, "and I
have to tell you that the boon I have asked and your liberality has
granted is that you shall dub me knight to-morrow morning, and that
to-night I shall watch my arms in the chapel of this your castle; thus
tomorrow, as I have said, will be accomplished what I so much desire,
enabling me lawfully to roam through all the four quarters of the world
seeking adventures on behalf of those in distress, as is the duty of
chivalry and of knights-errant like myself, whose ambition is directed to
such deeds."

The landlord, who, as has been mentioned, was something of a wag, and had
already some suspicion of his guest's want of wits, was quite convinced
of it on hearing talk of this kind from him, and to make sport for the
night he determined to fall in with his humour. So he told him he was
quite right in pursuing the object he had in view, and that such a motive
was natural and becoming in cavaliers as distinguished as he seemed and
his gallant bearing showed him to be; and that he himself in his younger
days had followed the same honourable calling, roaming in quest of
adventures in various parts of the world, among others the Curing-grounds
of Malaga, the Isles of Riaran, the Precinct of Seville, the Little
Market of Segovia, the Olivera of Valencia, the Rondilla of Granada, the
Strand of San Lucar, the Colt of Cordova, the Taverns of Toledo, and
divers other quarters, where he had proved the nimbleness of his feet and
the lightness of his fingers, doing many wrongs, cheating many widows,
ruining maids and swindling minors, and, in short, bringing himself under
the notice of almost every tribunal and court of justice in Spain; until
at last he had retired to this castle of his, where he was living upon
his property and upon that of others; and where he received all
knights-errant of whatever rank or condition they might be, all for the
great love he bore them and that they might share their substance with
him in return for his benevolence. He told him, moreover, that in this
castle of his there was no chapel in which he could watch his armour, as
it had been pulled down in order to be rebuilt, but that in a case of
necessity it might, he knew, be watched anywhere, and he might watch it
that night in a courtyard of the castle, and in the morning, God willing,
the requisite ceremonies might be performed so as to have him dubbed a
knight, and so thoroughly dubbed that nobody could be more so. He asked
if he had any money with him, to which Don Quixote replied that he had
not a farthing, as in the histories of knights-errant he had never read
of any of them carrying any. On this point the landlord told him he was
mistaken; for, though not recorded in the histories, because in the
author's opinion there was no need to mention anything so obvious and
necessary as money and clean shirts, it was not to be supposed therefore
that they did not carry them, and he might regard it as certain and
established that all knights-errant (about whom there were so many full
and unimpeachable books) carried well-furnished purses in case of
emergency, and likewise carried shirts and a little box of ointment to
cure the wounds they received. For in those plains and deserts where they
engaged in combat and came out wounded, it was not always that there was
some one to cure them, unless indeed they had for a friend some sage
magician to succour them at once by fetching through the air upon a cloud
some damsel or dwarf with a vial of water of such virtue that by tasting
one drop of it they were cured of their hurts and wounds in an instant
and left as sound as if they had not received any damage whatever. But in
case this should not occur, the knights of old took care to see that
their squires were provided with money and other requisites, such as lint
and ointments for healing purposes; and when it happened that knights had
no squires (which was rarely and seldom the case) they themselves carried
everything in cunning saddle-bags that were hardly seen on the horse's
croup, as if it were something else of more importance, because, unless
for some such reason, carrying saddle-bags was not very favourably
regarded among knights-errant. He therefore advised him (and, as his
godson so soon to be, he might even command him) never from that time
forth to travel without money and the usual requirements, and he would
find the advantage of them when he least expected it.

Don Quixote promised to follow his advice scrupulously, and it was
arranged forthwith that he should watch his armour in a large yard at one
side of the inn; so, collecting it all together, Don Quixote placed it on
a trough that stood by the side of a well, and bracing his buckler on his
arm he grasped his lance and began with a stately air to march up and
down in front of the trough, and as he began his march night began to
fall.

The landlord told all the people who were in the inn about the craze of
his guest, the watching of the armour, and the dubbing ceremony he
contemplated. Full of wonder at so strange a form of madness, they
flocked to see it from a distance, and observed with what composure he
sometimes paced up and down, or sometimes, leaning on his lance, gazed on
his armour without taking his eyes off it for ever so long; and as the
night closed in with a light from the moon so brilliant that it might vie
with his that lent it, everything the novice knight did was plainly seen
by all.

Meanwhile one of the carriers who were in the inn thought fit to water
his team, and it was necessary to remove Don Quixote's armour as it lay
on the trough; but he seeing the other approach hailed him in a loud
voice, "O thou, whoever thou art, rash knight that comest to lay hands on
the armour of the most valorous errant that ever girt on sword, have a
care what thou dost; touch it not unless thou wouldst lay down thy life
as the penalty of thy rashness." The carrier gave no heed to these words
(and he would have done better to heed them if he had been heedful of his
health), but seizing it by the straps flung the armour some distance from
him. Seeing this, Don Quixote raised his eyes to heaven, and fixing his
thoughts, apparently, upon his lady Dulcinea, exclaimed, "Aid me, lady
mine, in this the first encounter that presents itself to this breast
which thou holdest in subjection; let not thy favour and protection fail
me in this first jeopardy;" and, with these words and others to the same
purpose, dropping his buckler he lifted his lance with both hands and
with it smote such a blow on the carrier's head that he stretched him on
the ground, so stunned that had he followed it up with a second there
would have been no need of a surgeon to cure him. This done, he picked up
his armour and returned to his beat with the same serenity as before.




Shortly after this, another, not knowing what had happened (for the
carrier still lay senseless), came with the same object of giving water
to his mules, and was proceeding to remove the armour in order to clear
the trough, when Don Quixote, without uttering a word or imploring aid
from anyone, once more dropped his buckler and once more lifted his
lance, and without actually breaking the second carrier's head into
pieces, made more than three of it, for he laid it open in four. At the
noise all the people of the inn ran to the spot, and among them the
landlord. Seeing this, Don Quixote braced his buckler on his arm, and
with his hand on his sword exclaimed, "O Lady of Beauty, strength and
support of my faint heart, it is time for thee to turn the eyes of thy
greatness on this thy captive knight on the brink of so mighty an
adventure." By this he felt himself so inspired that he would not have
flinched if all the carriers in the world had assailed him. The comrades
of the wounded perceiving the plight they were in began from a distance
to shower stones on Don Quixote, who screened himself as best he could
with his buckler, not daring to quit the trough and leave his armour
unprotected. The landlord shouted to them to leave him alone, for he had
already told them that he was mad, and as a madman he would not be
accountable even if he killed them all. Still louder shouted Don Quixote,
calling them knaves and traitors, and the lord of the castle, who allowed
knights-errant to be treated in this fashion, a villain and a low-born
knight whom, had he received the order of knighthood, he would call to
account for his treachery. "But of you," he cried, "base and vile rabble,
I make no account; fling, strike, come on, do all ye can against me, ye
shall see what the reward of your folly and insolence will be." This he
uttered with so much spirit and boldness that he filled his assailants
with a terrible fear, and as much for this reason as at the persuasion of
the landlord they left off stoning him, and he allowed them to carry off
the wounded, and with the same calmness and composure as before resumed
the watch over his armour.

But these freaks of his guest were not much to the liking of the
landlord, so he determined to cut matters short and confer upon him at
once the unlucky order of knighthood before any further misadventure
could occur; so, going up to him, he apologised for the rudeness which,
without his knowledge, had been offered to him by these low people, who,
however, had been well punished for their audacity. As he had already
told him, he said, there was no chapel in the castle, nor was it needed
for what remained to be done, for, as he understood the ceremonial of the
order, the whole point of being dubbed a knight lay in the accolade and
in the slap on the shoulder, and that could be administered in the middle
of a field; and that he had now done all that was needful as to watching
the armour, for all requirements were satisfied by a watch of two hours
only, while he had been more than four about it. Don Quixote believed it
all, and told him he stood there ready to obey him, and to make an end of
it with as much despatch as possible; for, if he were again attacked, and
felt himself to be dubbed knight, he would not, he thought, leave a soul
alive in the castle, except such as out of respect he might spare at his
bidding.

Thus warned and menaced, the castellan forthwith brought out a book in
which he used to enter the straw and barley he served out to the
carriers, and, with a lad carrying a candle-end, and the two damsels
already mentioned, he returned to where Don Quixote stood, and bade him
kneel down. Then, reading from his account-book as if he were repeating
some devout prayer, in the middle of his delivery he raised his hand and
gave him a sturdy blow on the neck, and then, with his own sword, a smart
slap on the shoulder, all the while muttering between his teeth as if he
was saying his prayers. Having done this, he directed one of the ladies
to gird on his sword, which she did with great self-possession and
gravity, and not a little was required to prevent a burst of laughter at
each stage of the ceremony; but what they had already seen of the novice
knight's prowess kept their laughter within bounds. On girding him with
the sword the worthy lady said to him, "May God make your worship a very
fortunate knight, and grant you success in battle." Don Quixote asked her
name in order that he might from that time forward know to whom he was
beholden for the favour he had received, as he meant to confer upon her
some portion of the honour he acquired by the might of his arm. She
answered with great humility that she was called La Tolosa, and that she
was the daughter of a cobbler of Toledo who lived in the stalls of
Sanchobienaya, and that wherever she might be she would serve and esteem
him as her lord. Don Quixote said in reply that she would do him a favour
if thenceforward she assumed the "Don" and called herself Dona Tolosa.
She promised she would, and then the other buckled on his spur, and with
her followed almost the same conversation as with the lady of the sword.
He asked her name, and she said it was La Molinera, and that she was the
daughter of a respectable miller of Antequera; and of her likewise Don
Quixote requested that she would adopt the "Don" and call herself Dona
Molinera, making offers to her further services and favours.

Having thus, with hot haste and speed, brought to a conclusion these
never-till-now-seen ceremonies, Don Quixote was on thorns until he saw
himself on horseback sallying forth in quest of adventures; and saddling
Rocinante at once he mounted, and embracing his host, as he returned
thanks for his kindness in knighting him, he addressed him in language so
extraordinary that it is impossible to convey an idea of it or report it.
The landlord, to get him out of the inn, replied with no less rhetoric
though with shorter words, and without calling upon him to pay the
reckoning let him go with a Godspeed.
THE 

DEVOTIONAL POEMS OF MIRAbAI 




The 

Devotional Poems of Mirabai 


Translated with Inti oduction and Notes 


A J ALSTON 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Delhi Varanasi Patna 



<g) MOTILAL. BANARSIOASS 
PREFACE 


The present work is intended to offer the readei a fair 
anthology of Mirabat’s devotional songs, using for this purpose 
with only slight departures the fifteenth edition of Achar>a 
Parashuram Chaturvedi’s well-known selection The translation 
is intended to be faithful but readable Notes are given at the 
back, filling out briefly the references in the poems to Hindu 
mythology and tradition that might not be familiar to the non- 
Hindu reader mentioning such readings adopted as differ from 
Shri Chaturvedi’s text, and discussing problematical points of 
interpretation An Introduction is prefixed, containing three 
separate essays The first deals with Mins life The second 
sketches in the use and development of the Bhakti movement 
and tries to indicate Mira’s place in it The third discusses 
briefly the literary form and spiritual content of Miia’s Padavali 
The work is addiessed to the general icadcr rathci than the 
Specialist In the Introduction and tianslation full transi’tera- 
tion of Hindi and Sanskrit words and names has not been 
applied except in quoted phrases, but the long vowels a i and 
u have been marked as such throughout Final short a has 
usually been dropped in these sections where this seemed 
appropriate according to modern spoken usage Hindi ind 
Sanskrit names and words, including the names of modern 
scholars, have in pi inciple been transliterated in full throughout 
the Notes, where a greater degree of precision seemed required 
Though this has sometimes resulted m the same word or name 
being spelt differently indifferent parts of the book it should not 
cause serious inconvenience The familiar “Mira” has been 
retained, though no doubt Mirarp is the more correct form of 
the poetess’s name It inu&t be admitted that perfect consistency 
m spelling has neither been sought nor achieved Alternations 
between “You ’ and Thou ’ in addressing the deity occur 
occasionally in the same poem, but not in the same sentence 
The author, not being himself a specialist either in the 
Rajasthani dialect or the study of mediaeval Hindi texts has 
had to rely on secondary sources both for the interpretation of 



vm 


Mira s text and foi most of the information contained m the 
introductory essays The literature on Mira is now considerable, 
especially if account be taken of the work in learned periodicals 
and in languages other than Hindi The author has not attempt- 
ed to master all this vast range of material but has tried to 
make as intelligent use as he could of a few standard authorities 
such as P Chatu'-\edi, Padmavati “Shabnain ’ and Bhuvanesh- 
vara Nath Mishra, and, for the wider background H P 
Dvivedi.Ch Vaudeville and S K De In regard to the interpreta- 
tion of the text, besides the Notes of Shri Chaturvedi, the 
tikas of Y N Sharma and T Tandan, of D S Bhat! and of 
K D Sharma were all invaluable But on especially knotty 
points particular legard was paid to the Miran Kosh of Dr 
Shashi Piabha as it seemed that the discipline of constructing 
a gtammar and word-for-word dictionary of Shn Chaturvedi’s 
text must have given her the best chance of coming up with 
the right solutions (See e g Notes 72, 90, 91, 94 116, 119, 122, 
147 166 167 170, 176, 183) Thus the work is chiefly based on 
Indian authorities And it is hoped that, if not a work of 
scholarship itself, it at least registers and brings before the 
English leader a part of the results of the work of Indian 
scholars on Mira in the past few decades 

My deepest debts are to my revered spiritual Teacher, the 
late Han Prasad Shastn, founder of Shanti Sadan, London, 
who inspired all his pupils with a love of the mystical poetry 
of mediaeval India, while at the same time demonstrating in 
his own life that the practical teachings it conveys can still be 
applied and are fully relevant to the needs of the present day 
My obligations to scholars are indicated above and acknowledg- 
ed at appropriate points throughout the Introduction and Notes 
I am obliged to the Librarian and staff of the Library of the 
School of Oriental and African Studies London University 
for the use of facilities and loan of books I am extremely 
indebted to my wife for finding time inter aha to type the 
manuscript I am very sorry that it is now too late to thank the 
late Mr Sundarlal Jam the distinguished Indological publisher 
without whose encouragement the present book would not have 
appealed 


LONDON 


A J ALSTON 



CONTENTS 


Introduction 

Mira’s Life 1 

Mira and the Bhakti Movement 9 

Mira’s Poems 27 

The Poems 

In Praise of the Lord 

Humble Petition 14 

Songs of Love 35 

Love s Aspirations 38 

My Sole Support 40 

My own Path 43 

Differences of Opinions among Friends 44 

Plain Speaking 47 

Testing 49 

Sufferings in Absence 52 

Reproaches 55 

Hymns of Praise 59 

In the Throes of longing 68 

Rays of Hope 84 

The Lord 88 

Faith 92 

Expectation 93 

Meeting the Beloved 93 

Self-Dedication 96 

The World 98 

The Land of Braj 100 

The Childish Sports lOl 

The Playing of the Flute 102 

The Serpent 103 

Stealing the Clothes 103 

The Tryst 104 

The Steps to the River 105 

Selling the Curds 107 



C X ) 


The Departure for Mathura 108 

Conversation with Uddhava 110 

The Wild Woman of the Woods 112 

Sudama 112 

Reaping the Fruits of one’s Deeds 1 1 3 

The Impenetrable Realm 1 1 5 

Spiritual Teaching 116 

Notes I2i 

Index of Poems 139 

Authorities Quoted 143 



INTRODUCTION 
Mira’s Life 


The sketch of the life of Mira Bai here presented is tentative 
Like most modern accounts, it stems ultimately from the work of 
Munshi Devi Prasad entitled “Miratp Bai ka Jivan-Charitra”, 
originally published in 1905 But it incorporates modifications of 
Devi Prasad’s view, deriving from Acharya Parashuram Chatur- 
vedi, M M Gaurishankar Hirachand Ojha, Hermann Goetz and 
other authorities In her work entitled “Miran Vyaktitva aur 
Kntitva”, Padmavati “Shabnam” has set out the sources from 
which Mira’s biography has been gradually built up, and has 
reviewed and critically examined the mam efforts that have been 
made to reduce them to an intelligible whole She concludes that 
Munshi Devi Prasad’s theory is radically untenable, at every 
point, and is not to be saved by mere minor modifications It 
does indeed appear from her account that Devi Prasad’s theory 
of the life of Mira is really no more than an imaginative con- 
struction, an attempt to reconcile data about Mira’s birth and 
marriage that he found in the Archives of Mewar (Mahkamah- 
e-Tavarikh, Mewar) with the few facts that are known about the 
history of the Rajputs at the time, the data available in the 
poetry that has come down in Mira’s name, and the data in the 
later hagiographical literature For his account of Mira’s death 
he was partly dependent on the word of a court-minstrel whom 
he consulted and who claimed to be in possession of the correct 
tradition, though other traditions have been shown to exist with 
equal claims Padmavati “Shabnam” certainly shows that the 
result was in many ways a weak and flimsy structure But it was 
at least based on yo/ne documentary evidence, and it seems worth 
presenting the reader with some version of Devi Prasad’s theory, 
as it IS still the “consensus” view of modern Indian scholarship 
According to the consensus view, then, Mira was born about 
1498 A D as the only daughter of Ratna Singh, a Rajput noble 



2 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


of the House of Rafhor Her birth took place in a village in the 
neighbourhood of Merta, a small fortress-city some forty or 
fifty miles nbrth-east of the city of Ajmeer, itself about 220 miles 
south-west of Delhi Her mother died when she was still very 
young, and since her father was much occupied with fighting, 
she was sent to live with her grandfather Rau Duda ji in the 
palace of Merta, the city he had himself taken from the Mus- 
lims and peopled with Hindus in 1461 Here she is said to have 
been educated in company with her cousin Jaymal the future 
Rajput hero 

Mira appears to have been born m circumstances that favour- 
ed devotion to Krishna There is a tiadition that even befoie 
her mother died Mira had begged for, and ultimately received, 
an image of Krishna that had been in the possession of a holy 
man who visited her home And there is a further tradition that 
she became so attached to the image that her mother jokingly 
told her that Krishna would be her bridegroom Mira asks in 
one of her poems, “O Krishna, did You ever rightly value my 
childhood love‘^”(Poem 100) And she records (Poem 27) seeing 
herself married to the Lord in a dream (Chaturvedi, Mirarpbai 
Padavali p 19) It is likely that Mira’s devotion to Krishna was 
able to mature quickly during her time in the palace of her grand- 
father It has been thought that Mira’s life as an active devotee 
may well have set in here, with regular worship (puja) of the Lord 
embodied in an image, application of tilak to the brow, cere- 
monial waving of lights (arati) and so forth Rau Duda ji, his 
eldest son, Mira’s uncle Viram ji, and Viram ji’s son Jaymal are 
all mentioned as devotees in the later hagiographical literature 
It has been asserted on the basis of a reference to “a copper 
plate” that she was educated in the Vedas Puranas and Upani- 
shads by a Purohita called Gajadhara, who later accompanied 
her to her husband’s home at the time of her marriage 
(Bhuvanesvara Natha Misra, p 44) An education in Sanskrit as 
well as in music and dancing would not have been out of place 
in a Rajput princess of Mira’s day 

In course of time, probably not long before 1516, Rau Duda 
ji died Mira’s father Ratna Singh was still much away engag- 
ed in fighting, and her uncle Viram ji assumed responsibility 
for her education and welfare when he succeeded to his father's 



Introduction 


3 


kingdom Meanwhile in 1508 the great warrior Rana Sanga of 
the House of Sisodiya had succeeded his father Raymal to the 
Kingdom of Mewar, and ruled at Chittaur, the fortress that lay 
nearly 150 miles to the south of Merta, across the Aravalli 
Hills He was the acknowledged leader of the Rajputs, and 
their best hope for unity in facing the challenge of the Muslim 
powers that already hemmed them in on all sides and were 
soon to be augmented by the arrival of Babur In 1516 Rana 
Sanga sought to cement his position by marriage alliances He 
married Dhan Bai, of the Jodhpur branch of the House of 
Rathor, which ruled beyond his north-east boundaries He 
arranged with Viram Dev for the marriage of Mira with his 
own heir apparent, Prince Bhoja Raj, thereby securing the 
allegiance of the power immediately to his north And he entered 
into a marriage alliance with the power on his north-west border 
by marrying Karmavati Bal, sister of Hare Rau, King of Bund! 
It was this last alignment that boded ill for Mira For fifteen 
years later, in 1531, when Rana Sanga had been dead over 
three years, Karmavati’s son Vikramajlta (or Vikramaditya^ 
acceeded to the Kingdom of Mewar as a turbulent boy of 
fourteen, and Mira was exposed to the spite of the members of a 
rival house 

But this lay in the future In 1516 Mira was married to 
Prince Bhoja Raj, and from the fact that she was considered a 
suitable match for the heir-apparent at the most important 
capital of the Rajputs it would be concluded that her religious 
devotion had not yet led her to behave in any way that con- 
tradicted family customs The Sisodiyas, like the Rathors, were 
“Vaishnavas” or worshippers of Vishnu, m practice chiefly of 
His incarnation as Krishna Rana Sanga’s grandfather, Rana 
Kumbha, had been a noted devotee And there is a view 
(Goetz, p 11) that the “Jhali Rani”, the Rajput queen men- 
tioned in the devotional literature as a pupil of the low-caste 
Guru Raidas, was none other than Ratan Kunwari, mother of 
Rana Sanga If this is true, and if the Jhali Rani were still 
dominating the women’s side of the court at Chittaur in Mira’s 
time, it might help to account for the fact that in four surviving 
poems she speaks of Raidas as her Guru, and also for the fact 
that many of her poems are coloured by the imagery and technical 



4 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


terminology of the “Sant” school to which he belonged 
But It would not entitle us to think of Raidas as Mira’s personal 
Guru For he is believed to have taught in the middle of the 
fifteenth century, well before Mira was born He is also said 
to have passed all his life in the neighbourhood of Banaras It is 
believed by some that the Jhali Rani heard of his fame and had 
the power and influence to organize a considerable expedition to 
travel to Banaras to see him Those who hold this view are 
easily able to explain Mira’s persecution They say that the 
Jhali Rani initiated l.er into the habit of receiving sadhus of the 
Sant school as visitors to enjoy their sat-sang And then Mira 
continued with the practice after the Jhali Rani died or lost 
influence, thereby exposing herself to the charge of contradicting 
family custom 

Be all that as it may, the historians tell us that Mira was 
married to Bhoja Raj in 1516, but that the marriage was child- 
less and that her husband had already died before the death of 
Rana Sanga m January 1528 In her poems, Mira speaks of her- 
self as a virgin (Poems 51 and 77 ) The year 1527 was fateful 
for Mira Rana Sanga assembled a great force of Rajputs to 
oppose the invader Babur, who possessed a smaller but well- 
drilled army, disposing of cannon The Rajputs suffered a terrible 
defeat at Khanua or Kanwaha, a village a few miles west of 
Agra, not far from Fatehpur Sikri Mira’s father Ratna Singh 
was killed, and Rana Sanga received grievous injuries It is said 
that in January 1528 this heroic man was poisoned by some of 
his ministers to prevent him organizing a counter-attack on 
Babur which would have resulted in many further casualties 
(Goetz p 18, Padmavati, p 99) 

According to an arrangement made five years earlier, the boy 
Ratna Singh succeeded to the Kingdom He was the son of Dhan 
Bm, but Queen Karmavati had a prominent place in the regency, 
(Goetz p 12 f ) Though Ratna Singh’s mother was a member 
of the Jodhpur branch of the Rathor family, there was no sym- 
pathy in court circles for the Merta branch, and an expedition 
was sent to attack Mira’s uncle, Viram Dev, ruling m Merta 
It IS plausible to maintain that this was the beginning of a period 
of isolation for Mira, which drove her to make a final and 
complete rejection of the values of the society in which she was 



Introduction 


5 


brought up (Chaturvedi, Padavali p 21) The poems suggest that, 
not content with receiving sadhus in the women’s quarter at the 
palace, she began to sally forth to the temple in the town, 
mingle with the holy men there and dance before the image 
(Poems 17, 19, 21) According to one of the reports found in the 
Archives of Mewar, it was already under the rulership of R.atna 
Singh that the peisecution of Mira began However, he was 
killed in a scuflBle in 1531, and this left the way open for the 
installation of Queen Karmavatfs son Vikramajita as R.ana, 
at that time a turbulent youth of fourteen or fifteen A report 
found by Munshi Devi Prasad in the Archives states that Vik- 
ramajita first locked Mira in with a guard, and then, when that 
failed of the desired effect, made an attempt to poison her, which 
also failed (cited Padmavati p 151) As the poems attributed to 
Mira refer to a Rana who locked her in (Poem 42) and tried to 
poison her (poem 36 etc ), it is presumed that the Rana in ques- 
tion was Vikramajita But the authenticity of the poems referring 
to the Rana (Poems 32-42, 50 etc ) is on several counts regarded 
as doubtful And in particular, the traditions about the miracu- 
lous intervention of the Lord to save Mira from various different 
attempts made by Vikramajita on her life, even though some of 
them are referred to in poems that have come down under Mira’s 
name, are on the whole not accepted as factual by modern 
Indian scholarship On the other hand the notion of an abortive 
attempt at poisoning is commonly accepted as probable, since it 
IS supported by documentary evidence and by the earliest hagio- 
graphical literature It is supposed by several authorities that 
Mira took refuge with her uncle Viram Dev in Merta after the 
episode of the attempted poisoning, where she remained in 
company with him and her cousin Jaymal until Viram Dev was 
expelled from his own capital by the King of Jodhpur in 1538 
Some authorities attribute to this period of Mira’s life her wor- 
ship in the Chaturbhuj temple at Merta, the ruins of which still 
stand 

Though Munshi Devi Prasad was able to claim some sort of 
documentary evidence for his account of the birth, marriage and 
persecution of Mira, the rest of her biography can only be 
guess-work As the poet Dhruvadas (first half of the Seventeenth 
Century) mentions that she visited Bnndavan, it is presumed that 



6 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


she became a v^^andering ascetic and went to Bnndavan on foot 
after the expulsion of Viram Dev from Meita m 1538 The poet 
Pnyadas (first half of the Eighteenth Century), himself a resident 
of Bnndavan, also claims that Mira visited Bnndavan, and adds 
a colourful anecdote He says that when m Bnndavan she went 
to see JivaGosvami, the famous Teacher of theChaitanya school 
The latter refused to admit her, however, on the ground that she 
was a woman Upon this Mira is said to have cast Chaitanya’s 
doctrine in his teeth and made the retort “I used to think that 
the Lord Krishna was the only man in Bnndavan and that all 
the rest of the inhabitants were gopis Now I’ve discovered that 
there’s someone else here besides Lord Krishna who thinks of 
himself as a man ” Probably the story is apocryphal Jiva 
Gosvami would have been living in Bnndavan at the time of the 
supposed visit But he would have been a youngish and still 
obscure Brahmachari, about thirteen years younger than Mira 
herself, and not the famed Guru of mature years that appears to 
be implied by the stoiy (Padmavati, p 158 P Chaturvedi, 
Madhya Kalina Prem Sadhana, p 136) 

Whatever be the truth about the visit to and residence m 
Bnndavan, there is support in Bardic Chronicles and in Mira’s 
own poems (e g Poem 202) for the belief that she went to 
Dvarak on the coast of the Kathiawar peninsular and lived there 
a considerable time, worshipping in the “Ranachor” temple The 
historian M M Gaurishankar Ojha (cited Padmavati, p 158) 
makes Mira go direct to Dvarak on leaving Merta, without any 
intermediate visit to Bnndavan 

In regard to the date and place ot Mira’s death we are at a 
loss Pnyadas says that in the course of time evils fell on the 
city of Chittaur (it was occupied by the Muslims more than 
once and was finally to be destroyed in 1 568) and that the King 
of Mewar and Mira’s other family members began to think its 
decline was due to the persecution of a great devotee The King 
therefore sent a deputation of court priests to beg Mira to return 
Uncertain what to do, Mira retired to the temple of Ranachor 
to pray, and her body melted physically into the image of the 
deity In the absence of reliable information about Mira’s death, 
the legend provides a fitting image to remember her by Munshi 
Devi Prasad dated the event 1546 on the word ol the court- 



introduction 


7 


minstrel mentioned earlier, which enabled him to pinpoint the 
King m question as Udaisingh But the legend has not, on the 
whole, been accepted by modem Indian scholars as based on 
fact Other estimates of the date of Mira’s death have been given, 
following stray hints, most of them later than 1546 But there 
IS no settled conclusion 

As already mentioned, Padmavati “Shabnam” has reviewed 
the existing literature on the life of Mirabai, and the present 
sketch is certainly indebted to that part of her labours She 
concludes, however, that Munsht Devi Prasad’s theory that 
Mira was the grand-daughter of Rau Duda ji and the wife of 
Bhoja Raj is altogether untenable It must be admitted that the 
“consensus” view (originating from the respected Munshi) is 
not much more than a guess m regard to all the events in Mira’s 
life following the attempted poisoning But on Mira’s parentage, 
her mairiage, the persecution instituted be Ratna Singh, and the 
locking-up and attempted poisoning carried out by Vikramajita 
the Munshi was able to cite documents he had found in the 
Archives of Mewar Padmavati “Shabnam” finds them mutually 
contradictory and valueless as evidence (Padmavati, p 45) But 
in some of the cases she instances, it could perhaps be argued 
that the documents corroborate one another in substance, while 
only contradicting one another on points of comparative 
detail 

However, this is not the place to attempt to assess in detail 
what can of or cannot be salvaged for the “consensus” view, 
nor IS the present writer equipped for such a task It will be 
enough to suggest that it may be analyzable into stronger and 
weaker parts, if some parts can still be shown to have document- 
ary support The view to which Padmavati ‘ Shabnam” herself 
inclines is that Mira was the daughter (not the grand-daughter) 
of Duda ji and the wife of Rana Raymal, who was the 
father of Rana Sanga, and who reigned at Chittaur 1473-1508 
There seems to be little positive evidence in favour of this 
identification But it obviates the diflBiculties involved in picturing 
Mira as a widow, when she frequently refers in her poems to 
her jewelry, and as being persecuted by a young Rana of 15 
More significantly, it brings Mira back within the possible time- 
span of the life of Raidas This raises tne question of the 



8 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


possibility of accepting the four statements in the poems that 
Raidas was Mira’s Guru as the literal truth It is claimed locally 
that a strange stone figure opposite the so-called MIrabai temple 
in Chittaur represents the body and the insignia of Raidas 
(Chaturvedi, Madhya-Kalina Prem Sadhana, p 137 ) But there 
are difficulties in the way of accepting that Raidas could have 
been Mira’s Guru, such as the absence of traditions in the Sant 
school for connecting Raidas with Mira and the presence of 
traditions that he never left the neighbourhood of Banaras 
(Bhuvanesvara Natha Mi^ra, p 59) And while four of the poems 
attributed to Mira connect her with Raidas, the hagiographical 
literature does not Moreover, the reference to Dhanna m 
Poem 139 of her poems suggests a figure of the fairly distant 
past whose memory has already become encrusted with miracles, 
while in one of his own poems Dhanna refers to Raidas as a 
predecessor (Macauliffe, p 109) Even if this be regarded as 
inconclusive on the ground that Poem 139 might be an inter- 
polation, it remains true that there is no documentary evidence in 
favour of the view that Mira was a queen of Raymal, and what 
documentary evidence exists is against it, in as much as 
Padmavati herself refers to a list of Raymal’s twelve queens in 
which Mira is not included (Padmavati, p 135) And if the 
pioems of Mira mentioning a wicked and atheistic Rana have 
any historical validity at all, they fit in better with Vikramajita, 
who, though only a boy, is known to have been of a vicious 
temperament, whereas Raymal is credited with Vaishnava piety 
and the construction of a temple to Damodara at Kumbhalmer 
fortress in 1498 (Bhuvanesvara Natha Mi^ra, p 40) 

These considerations in partial defence of the “consensus” 
that Mira was married to Bhoja Raj occurred to the mind and 
It seemed right to set them down But as a non-specialist the 
present writer is in no position to detract from Padmavati 
Shabnam’s contribution If new light on the life of Mu a and 
on problems about the authenticity of the poems come down 
under her name is to come, it can only do so through serious 
first-hand investigations into the textual sources like hers It it 
should eventually turn out that the personal connection between 
Mira and Raidas was established, or even between Mira and 
some member of his school, it would necessitate some rethinking 



Introduction 


9 


about what poems should be admitted into the standard text 
of Mira’s Padavali For instance, some poems written in the 
technical terminology of the Sant school, excluded by Ach^rya 
Chaturvedi, might have to be included after all For the moment, 
however, the question appears to be in the balance It does not 
seem that Padmavati “Shabnam” has decisively refuted the 
consensus view 


Mira and the Bhakti Movement 

Whatever view be taken of the chronology of Mira’s life, she 
must have lived in the midst of a great devotional renaissance 
If the “consensus” view of her life be approximately correct, 
Raidas, Kabir, Vidyapati, Chandidas and Narsi Mehta were 
among her immediate forerunners Surdas, Guru Nanak, and 
the early poets of the schools of Vallabha and Chaitanya were 
her contemporaries Tulsidas, surpassing even Surdas as the 
greatest devotional poet in Hindi, was probably born towards 
the latter end of her life-span In the present essay it is proposed 
to sketch in the history of the rise ot devotion (bhakti) in India 
and to try to say something about Mira’s place amidst the 
various schools 

The word “Bhakti” comes from the root “bhaj” meaning “to 
share” The basic idea is that God (termed “Bhagavan”, also 
from the root “bhaj”) allows His devotees (His “Bhaktas”) to 
share m His own nature and His own Consciousness, if they 
offer themselves to Him in sincere love Thus expressed, the 
term Bhakti implies a distinction between the Lord and His 
devotee But amongst the Bhakti schools who offered their 
devotion to Vishnu, with which the present essay is chiefly 
concerned, only the “Brahma-Sampradaya” of Shn Madhva 
(1199-1278) held to the radical separateness of the world and 
the individual souls from God The mam tendency in Hinduism 
IS to stress the unity behind the apparent diversity of the objects 
of the time-space world, and in general the diffeient cults do 
just this, in varying ways and with varying degrees of intensity 

The dozen or so “classical” Upanishads commented on by 
Bhagavatpada Shankara (circa 700 ad) are the highest 
expression of the “Sanatana Dharma” or “Eternal Wisdom” of 



10 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


orthodox Hinduism They weie probably composed between the 
eighth and third centuries B c , the earlier ones being compila- 
tions, the later ones more like unitary compositions b> a single 
author They are regarded as being effective in the spiritual 
life of a devotee only after their texts have been synthesized into 
a harmonious whole and intei preted according to a aefinite 
tradition (sampradaya), possessing a doctrine that is logically 
defensible on its own chosen assumptions, the truth ot which 
has been verified by the personal experience of the Teachers 
who convey it The Upanishadic teachings thus synthesized are 
known as the Vedanta, and their exponents as Vedantins If we 
set aside the radically dualistic doctrine of Madhva as excep- 
tional and ignoie the Shaiva interpretations ot the Vedanta as 
not relevant to our present enquiry, the chief remaining schools 
of Vedanta may be oivided into two classes, both of which 
affirm that the leai is “non-dual” or “one-without-a-second” 
To the first class belongs the school of Shankara, maintaining 
“pure non-duality” (Kevala-advaita) To the second belong the 
schools of Ramanuja, Nimbarka, Vallabha and Chaitanya This 
second group of Acharyas ranges in date from the eleventh to 
the sixteenth century Like the school of Shankara, its members 
also maintain the “non-duality” of the real, but unlike Shankara 
they credit it \n various ways with real internal distinctions 
for Shankara, the world and its distinctions are illusory as is 
the distinction between the individual soul and the supreme 
non-dual Self in which, as puie undifferentiated Consciousness, 
the whole illusion rests For him, devotion to God conceived 
in limited or personal form is a most wholesome and purifying 
practice But it is only a prehminaiy Final liberation fiom cmI 
only comes through the knowledge that one is identical 
with the supreme Self that supports all as infinite undifierentiatcd 
Consciousness This knowledge or awakening comes primarily 
from hearing the supreme Upan,shadic texts from a competent 
Teacher who himself has direct intuitional awareness of the truth 
ot their content Even then, the texts can normally only do their 
work after the student has prepared himself to understand them 
by a disciplined life, (yama and niyama), and by reflection 
(inanana) and prolonged meditation on the Upanishadic texts 
under the guidance of the Guru 



Introduction 


11 


In the other Vedanta schools mentioned, it is generally speak- 
ing knowledge that is the preliminary and devotion the crowning 
part of the discipline They regard the world and its objects and 
also the multiplicity of souls as distinct emanations from the 
Lord But the Lord is present in all. He inhabits His creation, 
and He animates all living beings with a “ray” of His conscious- 
ness and is, in a specially intimate sense, “present in their heaits” 
The goal of the spiritual life is for the individual to disentangle 
himself from attachment to and identification with the body and 
to become aware that in his essential nature he is homogeneous 
with the supreme Spirit (purusottama), a ray of the latter and 
able to enjoy a love-relation with Him, conceived in personal 
form The Lord might rescue such a soul from the ocean of 
transmigratory life and transport him to His heaven on the death 
of the physical body, there for him to remain in perpetual 
adoration and felicity 

The Vedanta, however, is not based exclusively on the Upani- 
shads It has three starting-points (prasthana) in the classical 
Upanishads, the Brahma Sutras and the Bhagavad Gita The 
Brahma Sutras are the authoritative digest of the Upanishads^ 
and the Acharyas developed their systems by writing comment- 
aries on them, each interpreting their terse formulae according 
to his own peculiar logic The collection of Sutras as we have 
them piobably grew into existence gradually during (and befoie) 
the early centuries of the Christian era They refer to the Bhaga- 
vad Gita as an authoritative text, the composition of the latter 
being often dated vaguely to about 200 B c , since it quotes the 
later classical Upanishads, some of which appear to have been 
composed after Buddhism had spread 

The Vedanta is really a synthesis between the Vedic religion, 
developed by the Aryan invaders, and other forms of Indian 
worship with roots probably stretching back before Aryan times 
(Cp De, pp 162-176) The later Upanishadic period saw a 
challenge to the old Vedic religion and to the authority of the 
Brahmins who preserved it On the one hand, teachers like 
Gautama Buddha and Mahavira were attacking its sacrificial 
ritual as cruel and its caste system as unhumanitarian, and were 
giving ethical and spiritual instructions of a high order in the 
vernacular On the other hand the old Vedic religion was itself 



12 


DeTotional Poems of Mira Bai 


falling into decay What had begun as outdoor worship of the 
personified forces of nature later soared to the heights of true 
mysticism when the sages “pondered in their hearts, searching 
for the link between non-being and being” But it finally degener- 
ated into a soulless formalism, in which the meticulous perform- 
ance of the complicated ritual counted ever for more and more 
and the deity for less and less The Upamshads, it is true, 
contained texts unfolding the highest wisdom attainable by man 
But in the form m which they were preserved, these texts were 
addressed only to those members of the higher castes who had 
leisure in youth to learn the Vedic texts by heart, and to that 
small percentage of these which was willing to abandon house- 
hold life and take to the forests 

Oversimplifying somewhat, we may say that the response of 
Brahminical orthodoxy to the challenge of the “heretical” reli- 
gions was to allow the old Vedic religion to fall into comparative 
relapse and to adopt and refashion themes of popular worship 
We see various stages of this process registered in the Epics 
(Mahabharata including the Gita and the Ramayana), in the 
earlier Puranas, and later in the Tantras Included in it was the 
adoption of the ancient Bhagavata religion, which gradually 
assumed a levised form in which Bhagavan was identified with 
Vasudeva and Krishna, and both with the old Vedic deity 
Vishnu 

Meister Eckhart has said that it is the birth of Christ in the 
heart of the devotee now that matters, not so much His birth in 
Bethlehem many years ago The “historical Krishna” revealed 
(or rather not revealed) by modern scholarship is no more the 
Krishna who levealed Himself in the hearts of the saints of 
mediaeval India than the “historical Jesus" of modern Biblical 
scholarship is the figure that lit the hearts of St Francis and St 
Bonaventura The historical Krishna is in fact even more elusive 
than the historical Jesus But Acharya Chaturvedi thinks we 
have just about enough evidence to think of him as a great 
warrior and Teacher, a Kshatria of the Yadava tribe, who receiv- 
ed spiiitual instruction at the hands of Ghora Angirasa (Chan- 
dogya Upanishad III vii 6), who slew King Kansa at Mathura, 
who supported the Pandavas in the Mahabharata war, and who 
was eventually deified by the later generations of those who 



Introduction 


13 


followed his teaching (Chaturvedi, Vaishnava Dharma, p 32) 
Those who take this view commonly maintain that the Bhagavad 
Gita preserves the essence of Krishna’s teaching Admittedly its 
teachings do not agree very well with what is known of those of 
Ghora Angirasa (De, p 32 ff) But at any rate it was taken by 
the Bhaktas of mediaeval India as the personal word of Krishna 
And it marks an important phase in the restatement of the 
Upanishadic wisdom in a more popular form and with increased 
stress on the element of devotion 

Indeed, the Gita can be viewed partly as an attempt to 
popularize the Upanishadic teachings and bring them to a wider 
circle The author tries to preserve all that was great and pro- 
found in the earlier teaching and at the same time to make it 
available to all men of good will, living and working in the world 
The Upanishadic doctrine that liberation arises through attain- 
ing an intuitive knowledge of one’s identity with the world- 
ground (brahma-nirvana) is allowed to stand But the peculiar 
path of renunciation of worldly life and solitary meditation on 
abstract principles which leads to it is declared “hard” The 
prime purpose of the Gita is to teach an easier path to liberation 
This easier path has two phases The first consists in self-pun- 
fication through disinterested action (karma-yoga) The second 
consists m devotion to the Absolute conceived in personal form 
(bhakti-yoga) The devotion called for in the Gita seems to be 
something a great deal stronger than the mere meditation on the 
Absolute associated with this or that finite form enjoined in the 
sections of the Upanishads concerned with worship (upasana- 
kanda) It means living m the faith and conviction that one 
participates m the nature of God, in such a way that one concen- 
trates all one’s powers on God as the great whole of which one 
is a severed fragment, desiring above all to be re-united with the 
whole The devotee understands that he cannot know God in 
His tiue form But He conceives Him under forms that inspire 
deep awe and reverence and he expresses his love foi Him in 
service of His creatures The Gita does not specify whether the 
sincere devotee is dissolved in God at death or whether he retains 
his individuality Though it speaks of the soul as a “ray ’ of 
God, it does not mention the delights of a sojourn in Vishnu’s 
heaven So Shankara’s view that complete dissolution is meant is 



14 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


at least defensible It is a lemarkable point that Mira looks 
forwaid to complete dissolution in God at death (Poem 46, last 
2 lines), wheieas the great Vaishnava Teachers of the Middle 
Ages, such as Ramanuja, Madhva, Nimbarka, Vallabha and 
Chaitanya speak, m geneial, of the released soul retaining its 
individuality after death and enjoying felicity m one form or 
anothei m the adoration of the Lord 

The texts conveying Bhakti we have considered so far were all 
composed m Sanskrit and therefore, in general, immediately 
available only to those of the top three castes who had the leisure 
to learn that beautiful but complicated language Nevertheless, 
It was beginning to be affirmed more frequently that all men had 
access to salvation thiough the texts of the Epics and Puranas, 
even if the heai mg of the Veda and XJpanishads was confined to the 
“twice-born”, the three higher castes These castes did in fact 
manage to preserve their position and dominance and keep the 
tradition of memorizing the Vedic and Upanishadic texts alive 
But in the face of the criticism of Materialists, Buddhists and 
Jamas and of the apathy of many of their own members, who found 
little appeal either m cold Vedic ritualism or in abstruse Upanishadic 
speculation, adaptations had to be made The Brahmins absorbed 
into their own system many originally independent conceptions 
of the deity by identifying them with the deity Vishnu from their 
own pantheon From his dignified but comparatively subordinate 
role as sun-deity in the Rig Veda, Vishnu was elevated to the 
state of supreme Spirit and identified with Bhagavan, Vasudeva, 
Krishna, Narayana and other less widely known divine figures, 
so that the cults and beliefs associated with these deities were 
mingled together and applied to Him Similarly, the worship of 
the comparatively minor Rig Vedic deity Rudra was altered and 
expanded to incorporate new myths and new practices under the 
name of Shaivism or Shiva-worship Borrowing and adaptation 
from the practices and beliefs originally belonging to the non- 
Aryan indigenous population played a large part in all this pro- 
cess Indeed, the shock of the contact between the Aryan inva- 
ders and the pre-Aryan inhabitants had already been a factor in 
producing the creative tension that led to the lofty teaching of 
the classical Upanishads not to speak of the various phases of the 
Buddhist and Jama religions But with the advent of Vaishnavism 



Introduction 


15 


and Shaivism, the non Aryan element came even more to 
the fore By the time of the Tantnka and Shakta movements, 
beginning in the latter half of the first millennium a d , when the 
sectarian texts were addressing themselves to men and women of 
all castes and openly declaring that they had supplanted the Veda 
as the vehicle of salvation for men in the Iron Age (Kali Yuga), 
It was no longer a question of the old Aryan religion absorbing 
non-Aryan elements but rather of its being itself absorbed by 
that age-old “Mother India” already evident in the ancient 
Mahenjo Daro civilization 

As the period of the Vedic revelation proper (Shruti) gave 
way to that of the derivative literature (Smriti), the latter being 
at its height between 200 b c and 500 ad a whole new myth- 
ology was developed in the Law Books (Dharma Shastra, the 
Smriti par excellence), the Epics and the earlier Pi ranas After 
a comparatively weak challenge from the old Vedic gods 
Brahma, Agni and Surya, the two Vedic deities Shiva (formerly 
Rudra) and Vishnu came to dominate Their cult was eman- 
cipated from Its setting in the old Vedic texts, and drew fresh 
nourishment and new vigour from association with popular 
local cults It was in considerable part to this process that 
Vishnu owed His ‘ Thousand Names” The new religion had 
an exterior form consisting of image-worship (puja) m temples, 
quite unknown in the Vedic texts, and it had an interior or 
mental form, in which the deity was approached through newly 
devised methods of meditation as resident within the body of 
the worshipper Repetition with a rosary of short formulae 
embodying the name of the deity worshipped (mantra-japa) is to 
be accounted among the new techniques The earliest references 
connect it with the worship of Shiva, but the formula “Om 
namo Vasudevaya’ is already found referred to Vishnu in the 
fifth century literature, which is a sign that the actual practice 
of repeating it must have begun considerably earlier The other 
ancient deities of the Vedic pantheon lost status in comparison 
to Shiva and Vishnu, as is well symbolized in the early chapters 
of the Tenth Book of the Bhagavata Purana, where the child 
Krishna humiliates Brahma and Indra Mira refers to the 
humiliation of Indra in the opening poem of the Padavali 

The Vishnu of the Mahabharata and early Puranas is included 



16 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


in Mira’s conception of the Lord (Prabhu), bat is not the 
only or the foremost element According to the earlier concep- 
tion He “manifested” (pradurbhava) again and again in different 
forms to save His devotees from the attacks of the evil forces 
and to preserve the spiritual law when it was in danger of fall- 
ing into neglect According to a rather later conception 
Vishnu undertook “descents” (avatara) not only to relieve the 
immediate sufferings of His devotees and to kill demons plaguin 
the earth but also to leave behind amongst His devotees 
a memory of His deeds (lila), meditation on which would 
serve to purify the whole world of its sms (cp Adhyatma 
Ramayana, opening verse, Kirtim papa-haram vidhaya 
jagatam) 

During the course of the first millennium ad a new form 
of the worship of Krishna gradually developed, not found in 
the older texts and mysterious in origin Krishna the warrior 
and counsellor began to fall more and more into the background, 
and gradually the chief emphasis came to be placed on worship 
of Krishna as a boy of wondrous beauty, growing up from 
childhood to adolescence in the villages of cowherds on the 
banks of the Jumna a few miles upstream from Mathura The 
child Krishna is hardly known to the Mahabharata, but His 
deeds are recorded in the Vishnu Parana and Harivansha (fifth 
century a d ) Parallel with this development, though not 
intimately connected with it, temple-worship was developed 
both in Vaishnava and Shaiva circles Shankara Bhagavatpada, 
who effected the earliest surviving synthesis between the doctri- 
nes of the Veda, the Epic and the Puranas, speaks with marked 
sympathy of the devotional practices of the worshippers of 
Vishnu, even though he criticizes their theory of “Vyuhas” in 
so far as he found it unreconcilable with Upanishadic non- 
dualism (Brahma Sutra Commentary II ii 42) He enumer- 
ates them as visiting the temple (abhigamana), concentrating 
on Vasudeva (Krishna) in thought, word and deed, offering of 
articles before the image, active worship of the image in the 
form of bathing it, anointing it and decorating it with flowers, 
repetition of the eight-syllabled mantram (Om namo 
Narayanaya), and meditative practices (yoga-dhya«ia) (cp H P 
Dvivedi, Madhya-kalina Dharma Sadhana, p 124) 



Introduction 


17 


During this time, if not before it, the creative impulse in 
devotion to Krishna passed to South India The twelve devotees 
of Tamil Nad known as the Alvars, who apparently lived in 
second half of the first millennium a d , composed devotional 
hymns in the vernacular, celebrating Vishnu both in His form 
as the child Krishna and also according to the earlier tradi- 
tional conceptions They paid little attention to caste-distinc- 
tions and included in their number a king, a woman and several 
outcastes The work of the Alvars was valued and preserved by 
the “Acharyas” of the Sri Sampradaya, high-caste representa- 
tives of the Vedanta tradition, mostly monks, but more intimate- 
ly associated with the temple-worship of lay folk than Shankara 
had been They wrote commentaries in Sanskrit and produced 
a new synthesis of the Vedanta (Upanishads) and the deriva- 
tive literature (Epics, Gita and Puranas) They claimed to go 
back behind Shankara to earlier commentators on the Brhama 
Sutras whose work is now lost But in fact the old Upamshadic 
teachings were partly modified in the light of texts from the 
Gita, Mahabharata and Vishnu Purana so as to accommodate 
devotion to the Lord conceived in personal form as the supreme 
discipline The greatest figure in this movement was Ramanuja 
(second half of the eleventh century) Though a representative 
of orthodox Brahmanism, he partly relaxed the tradition accord- 
ing to which only the three higher castes had access to the 
Vedantic truth 

Ramanuja has been thought of as the link between Bhakti as 
a popular movement in the South and Bhakti as a popular 
movement in the North For on the one hand he called the 
Tamil works of the “outcaste” Sathakopa Acharya the “Veda 
of the Vaishnavas” and helped to preside over their preser- 
vation And on the other hand it is said to have been an Acharya 
of his line residing in Banaras, Raghavananda, who initiated 
Ramananda, who is in turn said to have been the father of the 
Sant tradition of Northern India, of whom more must be said 
below Perhaps too much should not be made of this connection. 
For none of the Sants actually mention Ramananda as their 
Guru (Chaturvedi, Sant Parampara p 224f ) And Ramananda 
IS in any case said to have broken with Raghavananda because 
the latter still adhered too much to caste distinctions Perhaps 



18 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Ramananda’s service to the Bhakti movement was to create the 
climate m which the Sants could give out their message He is 
said to have inspired people to carry the message that all who 
worshipped Han formed one great brotherhood quite indepen- 
dent of caste and to have set the example of instructing un- 
lettered folk 111 the vernacular about remembrance of the 
Name of God 

But South India produced one other phenomenon in the latter 
half of the first millennium a d that was an even more potent 
aid to the development of Krishna Bhakti than the Sn Sam- 
pradaya of Ramanuja, and that was the composition of the 
Bhagavata Purana (circa 800 ad) This magnificent work 
appears to have remained for several centuries after its composi- 
tion in comparative obscurity Ramanuja, for instance, does 
not mention it But Nimbarka, Vallabha and Chaitanya 
regarded it as of at least equal authority with the Veda It gives 
in fact what might be called the standard or classical account 
both of the sports of Krishna as child and adolescent and of 
the devotional tenets of the Vaishnava faith 

Mira touches so lightly on the scenes of Krishna’s child- 
hood depicted in the Bhagavata that it hardly seems neces- 
sary to give any connected summary of the narrative here 
The reader will find in Mira’s Padavali brief references to 
the childish sports of the Lord in the Brai, which must derive 
oirectly or indirectly from the Bhagavata Such are the expul- 
sion of the snake Kaliya from Braj, (Poem 1 and 168) the stealing 
of the clothes of the cowherd-maidens when they were bathing 
(applied by Mira to herself, conceived as a Gopi), (Poem 169) 
the morning ritual of setting off to pasture the cows, (165) and 
holding the Govardhana Mountain aloft to protect the inhabi- 
tants of Braj from the fury of Indra (1) In general, how- 
ever, Mira does not undertake to re-depict the sports of the 
Lord objectively (Cp Bhuvaneshvara Natha Mishra, p 196) 
Rather, she records episodes in her own private love-relation- 
ship with the Lord Like the Alvar poetess Goda, she believed 
herself to have been a Gopi in a former birth 

In one or two poems Mira refers to the Gopi (cowherd- 
maiden) Radha Building upon hints in the Bhagavata and 
other Vaishnava literature (and drawing also on local folk- 



Introduction 


19 


lone traditions) great poets of the order of Jai Dev and 
Chandidas in Bengal and Vidyapati in Darbhanga had developed 
the theme of a personal love-affair between Krishna and one 
of the Gopis, Radha H P Dvivedi has drawn attention to the 
idealism latent in the character of Radha as depicted by these 
poets (Madhya-Kalina Dharma Sadhana, p 159, 183, 194) But 
even allowing for such elements and for the fact that some of 
this poetry may be intended as an illustration of how ordinary 
human sex-love can be transfigured and raised to the plane of the 
love of God according to the tenets of the Vaishnava Sahajiya 
sect, (Chaturvedi, Prem Sadhana p 85 f ) it does seem to imply 
a markedly different conception of devotion from that of Mira 
So far as the writer’s very limited acquaintance with it goes, it 
seems to be extraordinarily brilliant poetry composed by con- 
noisseurs for connoisseurs Jai Dev addresses his “Padavali” (i e 
the Gita-Govinda) to the mind which has a taste for remembrance 
of Han and an enthusiasm for the fine arts (vilasa-kala) And it 
IS a commonly held view that whereas the erotic element in the 
Bhagavata Purana, though present, is a mere phase of the devo- 
tional element, in parts of the poetry now under discussion the 
erotic element tends to get the upper hand Vrajeshvara Varma 
claims (in Dhirendra Varma, p 353) that Vidyapati’s Padavali 
IS pure secular love poetry, and that about half the poems do 
not concern Radha and Krishna at all 

In any case there is nothing highly-wrought about Mira’s 
style, and no erotic element in her poetry whatever (Bhuvanesh- 
vara Natha Mishra, p 195) Mastery of the elements of versi- 
fication and music are taken for granted But Mira was primarily 
a devotee, and if she was a poetess or a musician or anything 
else whatever, that was secondary (Chaturvedi, Madhya-kalina 
Prem Sadhana, p 130) She borrows many of the traditional 
cliches of Indian love-poetry that are also found in Vidyapati 
and Chandidas But with her they are instruments used to 
express a deep and personally felt emotion She may use the 
marriage-bed as a symbol of mystical umon with God, in the 
manner of the Sant poets, or as a symbol of the devotee’s 
readiness to give the Lord all that is in his power But in 
Mira’s poetry there is no tendency to luxuriate in devotional 
feelings tinged with eroticism So she is not faced with the 



20 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


danger that besets the poet who evokes images of the Lord in 
the context of burning sexual passion, the danger of making the 
deity less than a person, of reducing Him to a kind of object, 
a source of exquisite emotions that is available to the devotee 
and, so to speak, “stands at his disposal” (Hacker, p 51) 
Neither is Mira in any way influenced by the tendency found in 
some of the later Puranas to elevate Radha into the Cosmic 
Power of the Lord or even to worship her in her own right as 
the Divine Mother Her Radha is simply an especially charm- 
ing fellow-devotee, who grieves when her Lord is “absent” and 
does all she can to please Him when He is present, as a good 
devotee should 

The present writer cannot discuss in any detail the resemb- 
lances and differences between Mira and the greatest of her 
contemporaries amongst Krishna-poets, Sur Das, for lack of a 
proper first-hand acquaintance with the sources Clearly she 
was not Sur Das’s equal technically as a poet In spirit they 
seem to stand close Both were true devotees of the Lord Sur 
painted scenes and incidents from the life of Krishna as child 
and youth Mira expressed a more personal associationship 
with the Lord One might have expected that, as a pupil of 
Vallabha, Sur would have looked forward to an eternity m 
Krishna’s heaven (Go-loka^ after death, whereas Mira begged 
for dissolution in the Lord But it appears that the difference 
on this score was not great Verses occur in Sur’s poetry in 
which he asks to be transported to Vaikuntha (Go-Ioka) and 
also others where he asks for “dissolution” (nirvana) But 
these requests pale in number and significance before his chief 
request, which was “Grant me devotion ” (Brajveshvara Varma 
p 209) Both he and Mira were concerned with the here and 
now rather than with the hereafter And this is the true attitude 
of the mystic 

qasr firdaus bapdddsh ‘’amal mibakshand 
md kah rindim ^ gadd dair mughdn mdrd bas 

Conventional piety brings its reward, 

A mansion in Paradise, 

But for a ragamuffin sinner like me, 

A seat in the tavern is enough 


{Hafiz) 



Introdnction 


21 


It has often been remarked that the occasional references to 
Mira in the later devotional literature of Vallabha’s school 
suggest that she was regarded as an outsider, an irregular 
devotee who did not belong to any recognized tradition 
(sampradaya) In Acharya Chaturvedi’s revised (fifteenth) 
edition of the Poems there is only one reference to a Guru, 
(Poem 111) and the particular technical term used (Sat-Guru) 
suggests association with the Sant school Shri Chaturvedi has 
expressed doubts about the authenticity of this reference, and 
even if it should prove authentic it need not necessarily point to 
a single Guru of the Sant school The Sants speak so often of 
the Sat-Guru and so seldom of any particular Guru that modern 
scholars have come to wonder whether the term may not be 
applicable to any Guru from association (Satsang) with whom 
one has learned spiritually valuable lessons Often the Sat-Guru 
IS the inner “voice” (jnana, viveka, sabda) heard by the poet 
in the interior depths of his own soul (Chaturvedi, Sant-Param- 
para p 162 f Vaudeville, p 116 f, p 137) In Poem 139 of 
Mira’s Padavali, which, again, may or may not be authentic, 
there are references to miraculous interventions by the Lord to 
save His devotees, who include the Sants Kabir, Nama Deva 
and Dhanna But even if it should turn out that the lines or 
poems referring directly to a Sat-Guru or to the Sants by name 
have to be rejected, there are still plenty of lines in the Poems 
that echo the Sants’ teaching 

It IS difficult to characterize the Teachers of the Sant school 
briefly, and they each had their own marked individuality They 
were unlettered Teachers of low caste, who had been giving out 
ethical and spiritual instruction on the plains of Northern India 
for some generations before Mira’s birth The style of their 
songs and many of the technical terms they used were inherited 
from earlier Teachers of Northern India called Siddhas and 
Nathas The Siddhas in their turn inherited much from the 
Buddhist Tantrika Teachers who had survived in Bengal, Assam 
and Tibet when the Muslims had overrun most of the Ganges 
plain 

The basic idea behind the Tantrika teaching and practice Itere- 
in question is that the whole cosmos is shot througfi with divine 
powers These powers are also present in the body of the adept 



22 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


and can be awakened by suitable ritual oi physiological practices 
In some of the poems attributed to him the Sant Kabjr speaks 
language which seems to point to experiences gained through 
arousing the “kundalini” through the various yogic “chakras” 
till It reaches the “thousand-petalled lotus” in the top of the 
head And there seem to be reference® to yogic practices of 
this kind m poems that are linked with Mira’s name but 
which are not allowed admittance into Acharya Chaturvedi’s 
collection in its present form Equally, there are poems attri- 
buted to each author denouncing such practices, especially if not 
accompained by the one practice, that really matters, continuous 
remembrance of the holy Name (Cp Vaudeville, p 143) 

Even in the present (fifteenth) edition of Shn Chaturvedi s 
version of Mira’s Padavali, however^ which excludes some well- 
known poems which refer to Raidas as a personal Guru and 
others which refer to yogic chakras, there remain plenty of 
echoes of Sant teaching, which may be attributed to what she 
heard when mingling with the Sadhus But her lesort to temples 
for dancing and singing (Poem 31 etc) and her practice of 
Puja of images (Poem 145) set her somewhat apart from the 
classical Sant tradition One can hardiv imagine Kabir or Rai- 
das dancing or performing PQja in a temple Mira uses the 
word “Rama” to mean God in general, which is a typical practice 

of the Sants But whereas they tended to speak of their God 
either as “featureless” (nirguna) or as “not even featureless ’ (i e 
totally indescribable), and seem to have used the word “Rama” 
mainly because it was in vogue, Mira definitely connects the 
name Rama with the visible image of her beloved Shy ima {Shri 
Krishna) (See Poem 16) In the opening line of Poem 187 she 
uses the word Rama to refer to Krishna as He greets His former 
play-fellow Sudama It must be remembered that Kabir and the 
Sams of his time generally were more preoccupied than Mha 
was with reconciling Hindu-Muslim dilfercnces They therefore 
attacked many things which they considered tended to divide 
but which Mira held dear, such as worship of images, obser- 
vance of special fasts (Cp Poem 145) and above all, the doctrine 
that Vishnu “descended” to earth This last was central to Mira s 
faith, as she believed herself to have been with Krishna in a 
pievious life 



Introduction 


23 


Possibly it would be right to say that Mira’s deepest spiritual 
affinities he not with the brilliant and sophisticated court-poets 
of the North East (Jai Dev etc ), nor with the brilliant temple- 
poets of Braj (school of Vallabha) nor with the “Nirguna-Vada” 
Sants of Uttara Pradesh, Rajasthan and the Punjab, but rather 
with the Krishna-devotees of Maharashtra and Gujarat It can- 
not be said that the mysticism of the saints of Maharashtra 
recalls the intimately personal relationship of Mira with her 
“Gindhara Nagara” But they are similar to Mira in their 
acceptance of temple-worship and devotion to Krishna personally 
conceived, along with emphasis on the remembrance of the Name 
and the view that devotion has a supreme phase that eventually 
culminates in dissolution in the deity 

For example, Jnaneshvara (1271-1293) composed in old 
Marathi a famous verse commentary on the Gita which has 
more than once been translated into English One of the remark- 
able points about this work is that, though its predominant tone 
IS devotional, some passages (as in the Shrimad Bhagavata) 
strike the note of Shankara’s pure non-dualism (Cp Gonda, 
p 218 f ) Thus in the exordium to the Sixteenth Chapter paying 
honour to his Guru Nivrittinatha as the sun of knowledge, he 
says “When the sun reaches the zenith of Self-knowledge and 
shines down ‘in the noon-tide of Realization of the Absolute 
(brahma-bhava)’, its shadow, the false self ot illusion (the 
individual ego of ordinary unregenerate experience), retires and 
becomes hidden beneath it, and then the ‘night of Maya’ no 
longer exists, the world disappears and the sleep of wrong 
knowledge no longer has any foundation ” Mira does not 
hark back to the terminology of the Upanishads in this way 
But she affirms the fundamental identity of the individual soul 
with the Lord, and begs to be dissolved in Him “Thou and I 
are one, like the sun and its heat” (Poem 1 14) and “Let my 
light dissolve m Your light before You depart ”(46) 

With the name of Jnaneshvara is linked that of Nam Dev, 
formerly taken to have been his contemporary, but now 
considered later by a centuiy He is probably to be identified 
with the poet of the same name who composed works in Hindi 
which are included in the Guru Granth Sahib (Chaturvedi, 
Sant-Parampara p 105) Nam Dev also speaks language that 



24 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


comes close to the pure non-dualism of Shankara The devotee 
(jana) and God (Thakur) become one, like water poured into 
water (Compare, once again, the last lines of Mira’s Poem 46) 
The deity, the temple, the act of worship are all one, as waves 
and bubbles are only water If one dances and sings before an 
image, it is the image itself that is dancing and singing Nam 
Dev regarded the remembrance of the holy Name of God as 
superior to ritual, charity or bathing in holy places He supports 
this claim with examples derived from the Puranas It is clear 
from her Padavali that Mira did not think otherwise Rememb- 
rance of the Name is the constant inner practice on the part of 
the adept, and is not confined to the repetition of the Name 
with a rosary It was so with the Teachers of the Natha school 
(Vaudeville, p 140) It was so with Nam Dev And it is still so 
with India’s holy men of the present century When Swami 
Rama Tirtha tripped and nearly stumbled over, he said ‘For 
a moment, Rama forgot Rama ” 

Remembrance of the Name, then, is a fundamental item in 
Mira’s spntual sadhana, more fundamental than the exterior 
discipline of worshipping the deity in the temple, more funda- 
mental than the singing and dancing associated with the “Mira” 
of popular conception Bui few can absorb themselves directly 
in the Absolute in its true nature as featureless (nirguna) 
Though the true nature of the Lord is to be without limitation 
or form (Mira’s “Han avinasT ), remembrance of the Name is 
usually associated with a mental image Though the devotee 
knows that any conception of the deity he may form is inade- 
quate, he nevertheless endows Him with visible form by “applying 
to his eyes the antimony of love (Brahma-Sanhita, quoted H P 
Dvivedi, Dharma Sadhana p 13) As the devout Christian imagines 
himself in the presence of Christ, so the Bhakta imagines 
himself in the presence of Krishna, Rama or Hanuman The 
Alvar Goda saw the South Indian village in which she lived as 
Brindavan, the other village-girls, her companions, as Gopis 
the villiage temple as the house of the foster-father of Krishna, 
Nanda, and the image it contained as Krishna Himself 

Similarly the Gujarati saint Narsi Mehta who was probably 
born about eighty years before Mira and with whose works she 
may well have been familiar, says “I went to Dvaraka with 



Introduction 


25 


Shiv Himself and held aloft a burning torch while Krishna and 
Radha danced I was so lost in the unparalleled sight that my 
hand was burnt by the torch before I was even aware of it ” 
And again “I took-the hand of that Lover of the Gopis m 
loving converse I forgot all else Even my manhood left me I 
began to sing and dance like a woman My body seemed to 
change and I became one of the Gopis I acted as a go-between 
like a woman, and began to lecture Radha for being too proud 
At such times 1 experienced moments of incomparable sweetness 
and joy He who was sitting, singing with Radha was also at 
that very time seated in my own heart ” (Chaturvedi, Madhur- 
opasana p 40 f, quoting from K M Munshi, Gujarat audits 
Literature, pp 190-1) If God is symbolized in human form as 
Krishna, then the devotee can approach God most intimately by 
imagining himself as a Gopi or as Radha Naturally this can be 
done with greatest intensity by a woman-devotee like Mira, 
already equipped by nature with a woman’s heart (Chaturvedi, 
op cit p 74, f) 

There is, however, a further point to note about Mira’s love- 
relationship with the Lord Generally speaking, devotee-poets of 
Krishna, whether they see themselves in a love relation with the 
Lord like Mira or merely depict His love-relationships with the 
Gopis or Radha, were apt to conceive the relation as an illicit 
one The Gopis are considered model devotees because, when 
they heard the sound of Krishna’s flute at night they abandoned 
their husbands and homes and sped at once to answer the call 
They preferred the tension of an illicit relationship that defied 
convention to the torpor of conformity with worldly values But 
Mira had no need to imagine an illicit relationship to demons- 
trate how a devotee defies worldly convention, as she had already 
publicly defied worldly convention by the intensity of her 
religious life and by her determination to frequent the company 
of holy men at all costs In fact Mira speaks very little of the 
Gopis (Cp Bhuvaneshvara Natha Mishra, p 196) Her poetry 
expresses her personal love-relationship with the Lord, which is 
predominantly conceived as that of an utterly dedicated Hindu 
wife 

Mira resembled Narsi Mehta and her contemporary Chaitanya 
in expressing vehement emotion by dancing and singing 



26 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


(Chaturvedi, Sant-Parampara p 91) We have seen that it is when 
viewed in this, light that she seems furthest removed from Sants 
like Kabir and Raidas Yet in other ways she resembles them 
Raidas re-aflSrmed from outside the ranks of orthodox caste 
Hinduism the old principle of Shankara’s Advaita that no 
devotional practices are meaningful unless they lead to knowledge 
of the final truth in the end “What are dancing and singing, 
austerities and clasping of the feet, if the Truth be not known'^”' 
(kaha bhayo nace aru gaye/kaha bhayo tapa kinhem//kaha 
bhayo je carana pakare/jaumlaum tattva na cinhem*^ Viyogi 
Han, p 190) He saw this knowledge as the melting of difference 
into non-difference(tab bheda abheda samavaiga, ihid) And this 
insight into the absence of difference is attained through the grace 
of the Guru and remembrance of the Name Raidas was united 
with the Lord “like borax with gold”, and this was also Mira’s 
ideal, as we have seen 

In this refusal to remain content with worship of the Lord 
conceived in manifest form (saguna), in this demand to realize 
her final identity with the Lord, Mira stands apart from the 
great Vedantic schools of Bhakti founded by Ramanuja, Madhva, 
Nimbarka, Vallabha and Chaitanya On the other hand her 
preoccupation with temple worship in its more emotional forms 
sets her apart from the typical low-caste Sants of Northern 
India, who nevertheless agree with her that the goal of the 
spiritual life is the transcendence of all finitude (Cp Padmavati, 
p 185f ) It is not that she speaks of Krishna as “beyond form” 
(nirguna), at least in the poems here presented of the Padavali 
And yet there is some truth in the striking remark of P D 
Barathval that she was “a Gopi whose Krishna was the Absolute ” 
No doubt she is unclassifiable, as has often been said But m 
her refusal to draw a line between worship of God face to face 
and complete dissolution m the deity she seems to stand closer 
to the school of Jnaneshvara than to any other (Cp Chaturvedi, 
Madhuropasana p 82) Two texts of Jnaneshvara express in 
philosophical form the mystery of the combination of devotion 
to God with a sense of one’s final identity with God which we 
encounter in the poetry of Mira He says “If you can hew out 
of the rock a cave which contains a temple, the image of God 
and the figures of a concourse of worshippers, wh> cannot yoa 



Introduction 


27 


combine non-dualism with devotion*?” And again “The fact 
that intuition of non-duahty can be combined with devotion is 
a matter of immediate experience It can never be explained in 
words ” (Quoted Chaturvedi, Vaishnava Dharma p 120) 


Mira’s Poems 

Mira’s poetical works are conventionally referred to as her 
“Padavali” The word Padavali means a series of padas The 
term pada was used by the popular preachers of the Siddha and 
Natha schools who preceded Kabir The pada in its more mature 
form was a short song conveying instruction on the spiritual life, 
usually rhyming and composed in simple rhythms, adaptable for 
singing The melody (rag) to which they should be sung is speci- 
fied, and they would usually have a Dhruvak or refrain for their 
opening or second line The author’s name is incorporated in the 
last line as a kind of signature 

The great Sanskrit poet Jai Dev refers to his Gita Govinda as 
a Padavali in the proem Here the word “avail” or series has a 
special significance, as the work is conceived as suitable for 
dramatic production But this is not the case with the Padavahs 
of the popular religious poets of mediaeval India They did not 
write their poems, but just composed and sang them from time 
to time In some cases, for example m the case of Kabir, Guru 
Nanak^ Sur and Dadu, attempts were made to reduce their work 
to writing fairly soon after their death But this was not so in 
the case of Mira Her songs simply survived in the mouths of 
Itinerant singers who learned them, sang them, sometimes altered 
them and added to them, and passed them on 

Various attempts have been made from the latter part of the 
last century on to collect and print Mira’s poems and some 
manuscript collections as well as printed editions exist A modern 
edition of Mira’s poems cannot be anything more than a mis- 
cellaneous collection of songs that have come down under her 
name, pruned of extraneous material by the editor so far as he 
IS able and arranged in whatever order seemed to him good 
Acharya Chaturvedi’s edition of the Padavali first appeared well 
over thirty years ago, but on the occasion of the fifteenth edition 



28 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


m 1^73 he subjected the text to considerable revision, partly in 
the light of material published m the intervening years and partly 
in the light of manuscript material made available to him by 
friends 

Shri Chaturvedi’s 1973 edition comprehends 202 songs, plus 
eighteen songs which include the use of the terminology of the 
Sant school, considered by him to be doubtful and placed in an 
Appendix No attempt to translate this latter group has been 
made here He also considers the songs containing conversations 
between Mira and her relatives inauthentic He accepts the poems 
in which Mira threatens to become a “login” or pictures 
Krishna as a JogI, while remarking that they should not be 
made a ground for supposing that Mira was an initiate of or 
subscribed to tenets of the Jogis of the Nath school Shri Chatur- 
vedi’s editition does not aim to be all-inclusive Svami Ananda 
Svarup’s “Mira Sudhasindhu” contains 1312 songs and Padmavati 
“Shabnam’s” “Brihad Pada Sangraha” 590 The last-named, in 
her “Miran Vyaktitva aur Krititva” (1973), has collected more 
material and suggested new methods of classification of the songs 
and comparison of the different versions Eventually a new 
picture of the Padavali may emerge, but for the present the 
edition of such an experienced hand as Shri Chaturvedi may be 
allowed to constitute a kind of standard version 

Everyone agrees that Mira’s songs have been much tailored 
and altered by the singers who sang them They are mostly in 
Rajasthani or Braj Bhasha, but also contain material in Gujarati, 
Panjabi or even Eastern Hindi (Chaturvedi, Padavah p 58) On 
the whole, the linguistic forms that have come down in the 
Padavali seem to correspond with geographical data of Mira’s 
life as reconstructed by modern scholarship Her childhood and 
youth in Rajasthan would account for the Rajasthani base Her 
travels to Braj and Dvarak and her mingling with holy men 
would account for the sprinkling of other dialects (Chaturvedi 
ibid ) 

Mira’s songs, being eminently popular and “singable” in style 
were evidently much sung in different places, and the versions of 
them which have come down to us owe part of their linguistic 
colouring to the local dialects of the singers who have sung them 
In many cases, what have come down to us as different songs are 



Introduction 


29 


really only different versions of one song made at different 
times by different singers (Padmavati, p 82) The more popular 
the song, the more numerous the alternative versions are apt to 
be Where there are several alternative versions of one song, the 
extra verses in the longer versions are inclined to be suspect, 
especially if any element of “modernity” is betrayed by their 
linguistic forms No doubt this helps to account for the absence 
of familiar lines in several of the poems as printed in Chaturvedi’s 
text (See eg Poems 12^ 18, 154, 193) 

The spiritual teaching in Mira’s Padavali, which is what most 
interests the person who reads her songs in English, may be 
summarized as follows, drawing largely on Acharya Chaturvedi’s 
work Mira’s expeiiences of death and bereavement in a Rajput 
family taught her the flimsiness of all worldly supports Life is 
short The body will soon mingle with the dust (Poem 156) 
Whatever mode of human life be adopted, it will be like the 
sporting of sparrows that will end at nightfall (195) Committing 
suicide at a holy place or the formal adoption of the life of a 
monk will not help, as without the intervention of the Lord one 
remains caught in the net of rebirth (195) The spectacle of the 
way people live in the world when bereft of associationship with 
holy men evokes tears (18) Without worship, man’s life is a 
poor thing, (160) a mere burden 

Mira cherished visual images of the beauty of the Lord in His 
manifest form as an adolescent boy (Kishor) in Gokul She sings 
of his divine sports She dances before His image in the temple 
(36, 37) She drinks His footwash after Puja in the temple (31) 
She ensconces His image in her heart She longs to embrace His 
feet and be His personal servant (94, 154, etc) Whatever He 
clothes her in, that she wears (20) 

The path of devotion is difficult and the devotee finds un- 
expected obstructions (54) Desire comes like a cur and imposes 
his fetters (158) Pride is like a mountain on the slopes of which 
water will not settle (158) 

Mira was loyal to her aristocratic lineage in the very courage 
with which she rejected its customs Her love was hidden at first, 
but later it expanded, like the seed of a banyan tree, for all to 
see At the beginning of her love she might have restrained it. 
But once she was in mid stream there was no turning back She 



30 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


follows the guidance of her Lord wherever it leads her, like a 
puppet attached to the thin thread of love (173) She accepts 
praise or blame with equal humility and passes on (13) 

In one sense, Mira is ever conscious of the presence of her 
Lord within her heart “Only she whose Beloved is abroad needs 
to write letters my Beloved rests ever m my heart ” (23) She 
has actually seen Him, present in her heart (darasa lahyaip 
sukha-rasi. Poem 194) Hence her every act is an act of worship 
Wherever her feet touch the earth she is dancing in love of her 
Lord (21) Yet the paradox holds that as long as worldly-Iife 
lasts He is both present and absent The lover of God is he who, 
being awake to the presence of God, feels His absence, hidden 
by the world of multiplicity, all the more keenly Shri Chaturvedi 
quotes the Indian Sufi poet Jayasi, “The nectar of the sense of 
absence abides in love like honey in the honeycomb ” Mira 
loves the Lord with the fidelity and loyalty of a young wife faced 
with the absence of her husband (66) Only those who have felt 
the gash know the pain of love- wounds (70 and 102) The sights 
and sounds of nature in spring or the rainy season only add to 
the pain 

Both the sense of the absence for the Lord and the aware- 
ness of His presence are capable of filling the devotee with such 
emotion that he is reduced to impotence In the absence of her 
Lord, Mira wishes to write Him a letter, but her hand trembles 
and she is unable Love is a state which reduces one to silence 
The Gopis distributing curds in pots are so earned away by 
the sight of Krishna that they cannot remember the word for 
curds (177) But Mira dwells with particular insistence on the 
effect of the sense of the absence of the Beloved It is felt so 
keenly as to induce a kind of madness (divani, 70, 97, 130), 
involving an indifference to all worldly objects and values A 
grain ot Sufism seems to be detectable in Mira’s mysticism, 
perhaps derived from her associationship with holy men of the 
Sant school, who themselves mingled with the Muslim mystics 
She seveial times refers to her “darad”, which prompts recall 
of a certain later Indian Sufi poet (who was indeed known as 
“Dard ) who said 

dard i dil ke waste patdd kiyd insdn ko 

varanah td^at ke liye kuch kam na the karubiydrri 



Introduction 


31 


He created man to suffer agonies of the heart 
If It had only been a question of obedience. 

There was not a scarcity of angels 

Mira predominantly worshipped God “with form” (saguna), 
and cannot without qualification be classed among the Sants 
But her love is of the kind that demands and presupposes iden- 
tity with its object, and when she emphasizes the identity-aspect 
her lines remind us not only of the Sants but sometimes even 
of the Upanishadic sages Adoration of the beautiful Shyam is 
the dominant theme in her poetry, but the Beloved is Himself 
said to be “like the Indestructible Principle ”(26) Mira is con- 
scious of her identity with and separation from God at the same 
time She can say “Thou and I are one like the sun and its 
heat” and “Come to my house. Thy coming will bring peace” 
in the same song (114) She speaks mysteriously of an “impene- 
trable realm, that Death himself trembles to look upon ” The 
phrasing of some lines in Mira suggests familiarity with and 
willingness to reproduce the teachings of Kabir (See Note 165 to 
Poem 158) In lines like “I care neither for Ganges nor Jumna, I 
am making my way to the sea” (Poem 24) we hear an echo of 
the ancient Upanishadic wisdom, through which the soul loses 
Its individuality and unites in perfect identity with the supreme 
Spirit She speaks of the body as a smock of five colours (the 
five elements) in which she is playing hide and seek with the 
Lord Taking into account the traditions of Mira’s childhood 
passion for the image of Krishna, and combining this with what 
In Praise of the Lord 


1 

Worship the feet of Han, O my mind. 

Beautiful to look upon, soft and cool as a lotus. 
Able to remove the three kinds of pain ^ 

When Prahlad grasped those holy feet 
He was elevated to the rank of Indra ^ 

When Dhruv took refuge in them 

He was transported to the motionless realm ® 

In the fair body of the holy Dwarf 
They measured the universe * 

Their touch saved the wife of Gautam ® 

They tamed the serpent Kaliya 
When Krishna sported as a cowherd ® 

They supported the Govardhan Mountain 

When Indra was put to shame 

Mira is the servant of Lai Giridhara,® 

The raft on which to cross the unnavigable sea * 

2 


1 bow to Bihari,^® 

Master of the arts of love 
His crown is a peacock s plume 
And the tilak^^ gleams upon his brow 
His golden ear-rings and raven locks 
Are waving gracefully at his ears 
He is playing the flute 
That rests at His adorable lips 
Experiencing deep joy Himself. 

He IS charming the hearts of the women of Braj 12 
On beholding this beautiful vision of Mohan^® Giridhara, 
Mira swoons in ecstasy 



34 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Humble Petition 
3 

Come, take up Thy abode in my eyes, 

O Son of Nand 

Thy dark form is charming to look upon. 

Thy lovely eyes loom large 

Thou hast applied the red tilak 

And art wearing Thy crocodile ear-rings. 

With Thy peacock-plume for a crown 

Thy necklace of gems is hanging from Thy neck. 

And there is Thy flute. 

Spreading forth nectar from Thy holy lips 
Thy belt is adorned with small bells. 

And the jingling of Thy anklets charms the heart 
Mira’s Lord is Gopal,^® 

He who watches over His devotees with love 
And delights the hearts of holy men 

4 

0 Hari'i’ Thou art the support of my life’ 

1 have no other refuge but Thee 
In all the three worlds 

Though I have searched the whole universe. 
Nothing pleases me but Thou 
Says Mira, “O Lord, I am Thy slave 
Do not forget me ” 


5 


Deign to favour me, O Han, 
With the gift of a single glance 
My gaze is ever fixed on Thee, 
But Thine is withdrawn 
Hard indeed must be Thy heart 
All my hopes are fixed 
On receiving a single glance, 

1 have no other refuge whatever 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


35 


I am standing before Thee m supplication. 
And behold’ The dawn has come 
Mira’s Lord is Han, the Indestructible 
To Him would she sacrifice her life 


Songs of Love 
6 

My Lord is that Brajavasi^® of Gokul 

All the inhabitants of Braj 

Feel deep joy at the sight of the Divine Sports, 

And the women are enraptured 

All dance and sing and clap their hands 

And laugh for joy 

Now the merits of Nand and Yashoda 
Arising from pious deeds in former births 
Have come to fruition. 

And the Lord, the Indestructible, has come 
He wears His yellow loin-cloth. 

His necklace of gems hangs upon His chest 
And He holds the fair flute in His hands 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly^J Giridhara 
May He grant unto His servant 
His holy sight 


7 


Sister, Shyam®2 smiles 

And gazes at my body with His lustrous eyes 
His eyebrows are the bow. 

And His side-long glances the arrows 
Which strike against my heart 
Come, says my companion, heal thyself 
See, I will draw a yantra®® 

And affix it to thy body, 

I will crush herbs and bring them for Thee 
But if thou art smitten with the disease of love 
Such remedies will not avail 



36 


Deyotional Poems of Mira Bai 


How can I heal myself, O my compamon*? 

I may crush cool sandalpaste and apply it, 

I may resort to the magic of yantra and mantra, 2* 
But that Sweet image has entered my heart 
And the damage is done 
Bring that Dark-Faced One before me, 

I stand smiling in His expectation 
Pierce my body, look within 
And see the broken fragments of my heart 
Without vision of her Lord Giridhara, 

How can Mira continue to inhabit this house‘s®® 

8 

O my companion, that impudent Son of Nand 

Has made His abode m my heart 

He is holding the branch of a kadamba tree 

And smiling gently in my direction 

His yellow loin-cloth reaches to His knees, 

He wears a gem-studded crown upon His brow, 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara, 

Her mind is entrapped by His form 

9 


Having beheld Thy beauty 
I am caught and enmeshed 

My family members repeatedly try to restrain me. 

But attachment to the Dancer with the Peacock Plume 
Has now sunk deep 

My mind is drowned in the beauty of Shyam, 

And the world says I have gone astray 
Mira has taken refuge with the Lord 
Who knows the contents of every heart 

10 


My eyes are spell-bound 

By the beauty of the angular pose^a of the Lord 
On beholding the beauty of Madan,®’ 



Derotional Poems of Mira 


37 


My eyes drink in the nectar 
And do not blink 

Attracted by the lotus-petal beauty of His brows. 
It IS as if they were now entangled 
In His curling, odorous locks 
His body is bent at the waist. 

His hands curved over the flute. 

His turban is aslant and His necklace swinging 
Mira is thrilled by the beauty of the Lord, 

Of the courtly Giridhara, dressed as a dancer 

11 

I ana utterly charmed by Mohan’s beauty. 

His beautiful body. His lotus-petal eyes. 

His side-long glances, His gentle smiles 
He grazes His cows by the Yamuna,^® 

Playing sweetly on His flute 

I sacrifice to Giridhara 

Body, mind, wealth and all 

Mira is hugging closely those lotus feet 

12 


0 my companion, 

1 have beheld Shyam, the Son of Nand 

I have lost all consciousness of my surroundings 
And worldly shame has fled 
How beautiful are the crescent moons 
Shimmering on His peacock-plume crown’ 

He weais a tilak-mark of saffron 
Set between His lovely eyes 

His crocodile-earrings are glinting by His cheeks. 
And His dark locks, playing in the breeze. 

Look like fish rising up from a lake 

To greet those monsters of the deep 

The Lord wears the garb of a dancer 

And His beauty has charmed the whole world 

Mira would sacrifice her all 

To every limb of the Lord Giridhara 



38 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bat 


13 

Once they are fixed upon the Lord 

My thirsty eyes do not waver 

They drink in every atom of His body. 

Ranging with anxious longing 
From head to toe 

I was standing at the door of my house 
When Mohan passed 
He was smiling gently. 

His face radiant as the moon 

My relatives reproach me and crack bitter jests. 

But my wayward eyes brook no obstruction 
They are sold and belong to another 
Whether they praise me or chide me, 

I accept whatever is said 

And raise it reverently to my forehead 

Says Mira “Without my Master, Gindhara, 

I cannot exist for a second ” 

14 

O my companion. 

Strange is the behaviour of my eyes 
That sweet form has entered my mind 
And pierced its way into my heart 
How long have I been standing in my house 
Gazing down the road*^ 

My very existence depends on Shyam, the Beloved 
He IS the herb that grants me life 

Mira has become the personal property of Gindhara 
The people say she is mad 


Love’s Aspirations 
15 

O my companion, I will mstal 
That lotus-like figure m my eyes 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


39 


Now Shyam has come 

And I dare not blink 

Muran2» has come to dwell in my heart. 

Every instant I enjoy His sight 

I adorn myself to receive Shyam 

And prepare a bed for His enjoyment 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 

Again and again she offers Him her all 

16 

Do not lose hold of such a gracious Master^ 
Offer thy body, mind and wealth 
To Him alone 

Cherish His image in thy heart 
Come, my companion, look at His face. 
Drink in the beauty with thine eyes 
Act only to please Him, in every way 
Shyam is lovely to look upon. 

On a glimpse of His visage I live 

Knshna^o is Mira’s Lord 

Fortunate is she to have found His favour 

17 


I danced before my Gindhara 
Again and again I dance 
To please that discerning critic. 

And put His former love to the test 
I put on the anklets 
Of the love of Shyam, 

And behold ' My Mohan stays true 

Worldly shame and family custom 

I have cast to the winds 

I do not forget the beauty of the Beloved 

Even for an instant 

Mira is dyed deeply in the dye of Han 



40 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


My Sole Support 
18 

My love is reserved for Gindhara Gopal^i 
And for no-one else 

0 ye saints and holy men, 

1 have seen the world and its ways 
I left brothers and relatives 

And all I possessed 
Dispensing with worldly shame, 

I came to sit with the holy men 
I felt joy in the company of the devotees. 

On beholding the world I wept 
I planted the creeper of love 
And watered it with my tears 
I churned the curds 
And drew forth the ghee 
The butter-milk I rejected 
The King sent me a cup of poison^®^ 

I drank it down with joy 
Mira’s love has set in deeply. 

She accepts whatever comes 

19 

0 my companion, 

1 am dyed deep m the love of Shyam 
I have donned anklets and ornaments 
And danced before Him without shame 
Now I keep company with the devout 
And evil thoughts no longer assail me 
Love of Shyam is the one true thing 

In all the world 
Night and day 

Have I sung the glories of Han 
I escaped from the black serpent ^3 
Without Shyam the world would be a desert. 
And all worldly talk is vam and insipid 
Mira weH knows the delights of devotion 
To that courtly Gindhara, robed as a dancer 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


41 


20 

Let me go to the house of Gindhara 

Gindhara is my true lover 

On beholding His beauty, I long for Him much 

As night falls I set out to see Him 

And at break of day I return 

Day and night I sport in His company, 

I please Him in any way I can 
Whatever He clothes me in, that I wear 
Whatever He offers, that I eat ssa 
My love for Him 
Is ancient and long-standing 
Without Him I could not live 
Wherever He places me, there I remain 
If He sold me into slavery, 

I would acquiesce 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 

She offers herself in sacrifice agam and again 

21 

0 my companion, all I can see»® is Shyam, 

All I can think of is Shyam 

Wherever my feet tread the earth 

1 am dancing in his honour 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 
In His company 

She IS walking the woods and lanes ®® 

22 

Sister, I have bought Govind in the market 
You only speak of it secretly. 

But I proclaim it openly, beating a drum 
You say it was expensive. 

But I say it was cheap. 

And I measured it out on the scales 
I would offer my body, 

I would offer my life. 



42 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


For a prize beyond all price 

0 Lord of Mira, grant her Thy sight 
According to Thy promise in her former birth 

23 

1 am dyed in the love of Giridhara, 

My Beloved 

0 my companion, 

1 am playing hide and seek with Him, 

Robed in this smock of five colours *8 
Disguised as I was. He caught me. 

And on beholding His beauty 

I made myself over to Him, 

Body and soul 

Only she whose Beloved is abroad 

Needs to write letters 

My Beloved rests ever m ray heart. 

He neither comes nor goes 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara 

She awaits Him fervently, night and day 

24 

I have turned my back on this palace*® 

Once and for all. 

And the bolt is drawn 
My good deeds in former births 
Have come to fruition 
I have no use even for great lakes, 

Who would linger over small ponds and reservoirs 
I care neither for Ganges nor Jamna, 

I am making my way to the sea 
I do not need worldly associationships, 

I have access to the true masters 
I will not trouble with the officials, 

I will go direct to the court 

I, who beat iron with a sledge-hammer. 

Am not concerned with pewter and glass 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


43 


I trade in diamonds 

And do not care for gold and silver 

To my very great good fortune 

A mine of precious stones is at hand 

Who would forsake a cup of nectar 

To drink brackish water‘d 

My Lord, 

Now I have made acquaintance with Thy devotees 
And shun the world from afar 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 
He has fulfilled her desires 


My Own Path 
25 

Mira is dyed deep in the love of Han 

And all else is blocked out 

I wear only bangles, tilak and beads 

Beyond this, my only further ornament 

Is my virtuous life 

No other embellishments please me, 

Such was the wisdom 

I received from my Teacher 

Some may revile me, others may praise me. 

But I will only sing the glories of Govind 

Wheresoever Krishna leads. 

Thither will I follow 
I will not steal, 

I will harm no one. 

How can anyone touch me*^ 

I will not descend 

From the back of an elephant 

To ride upon an ass 


26 

Come sport with me here, my companions. 
And refrain from visiting the houses of others 



44 


DeTOtional Poems of Mira Bai 


False are rubies and pearls. 

False all glamour and glimmer 
False IS all external finery, 

One’s only real necklace 

Is love of the Lord 

False are the silks of the south. 

But the rags 

Of love of the Lord are true. 

For in them the body stays pure 
Eschew nch food 

Cooked in the fifty-six kinds of condiments 
Flawed are all such enjoyments. 

But the simple diet 
Of love of one’s Lord 
Is good, cooked with salt or saltless 
Do not envy the orchards of another. 

Till thine own poor plot 
And good things will come of it 
If someone else 

Has a rich and handsome husband. 

It IS nothing to do with thee 
If you seek his society 
No one will approve 
It IS good to remain loyal 
To one’s own husband. 

Even if he be poor and a leper. 

On this all are agreed 

My Beloved is like the Indestructible Principle, 
Love of Him is true love 
The Lord has revealed Himself to Mira 
This IS the path of true devotion 


Differences of Opinion Among Friends 
27 


Sister, the Lord of the Poor 
Came to wed me in a dream 



Devotional Poems of IVfira Bai 


45 


Fifty-six crores of deities formed the bridal procession 
And the bridegroom was the Lord of Braj 
In my dream, 

I saw the wedding-arch constructed 
And the Lord took my hand 
In my dream, 

I underwent a weddmg-ceremony 
And entered the married state 
Giridhara has revealed Himself to Mira 
Her fortunes stem 
From good deeds in past births 

28 

Do not restrain me, my companion, 

I am going to visit the holy men 
Shyam’s form 

Has come to dwell in my heart. 

And I care for no other 

All the world is sleeping happily, 

But my eyes are awake 
Mad and bereft of all insight. 

Is he who rejects my Shyam, 

Shyam invades my heart 

And I cannot sleep 

No one drinks water 

From the puddles that spring up 

In the rainy months. 

But Han is a perpetual fountain of nectar. 

Which quenches my thirst 
Beautiful is Shyam, 

I am leaving now to gaze upon His face 
Mira is but a bewildered abandoned girl 
Come, accept her as Thine own 



46 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Opposition 

29 

Though He is forbidden to me, 

I cannot do without Shyam 
I will keep far away from the world 
And enjoy the company of holy men 
And the bliss of Han 
He can take my body and mind, 

As He already has my head 
My mind is fixed on Gindhara 
And cares not for the insults of the world 
Mira’s Lord is Han, the Indestructible 
She says I have taken refuge with Thee 

30 

O King’ " Today I was very fortunate 
And enjoyed the company of holy men 
Those who associate with holy men 
Increase their devotion four-fold 
Do not associate with the Shaktas,^^ 

It will interfere with your devotion 
All sixty-eight places of pilgrimage 
Reside at the feet of a holy man. 

Along with Banaras and the Ganges 

Ten million times over 

Whoso abuses a holy man will go blind. 

Be crippled and end m hell 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 

She says I cover my limbs 

With the dust of the feet of holy men 

31 

Sister, I will sing the glories of Govind 

I will rise regularly at dawn 

And go to the temple to have His sight. 

And drink the water that has washed His feet 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


47 


I will dance in the temple of Han, 

Making my anklets jingle 

I will sail the boat of the Name of Shyam 

And cross the Ocean of Becoming 

This world is a thorny briar-bush 

And the road to the Beloved is blocked 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara 

She will reach Him through singing His glories 


Plain Speaking 

32 

Your gorgeous kingdom does not please me 

0 King, there are no holy men in thy kingdom. 
All are liars and good-for-nothings 

1 have given up all my ornaments. 

Even my bangles, O King 

I do not plait my hair 
Or apply ointment to my eyes 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara, 

She has found the perfect bridegroom 

33 


0 my King, 

1 relish this loss of good name greatly 
Some will revile me, some will praise me. 

But I shall follow my unfathomable path 
On this narrow path 

I have met men of God ,4® 

Why turn back and abandon my unfathomable path ^ 

In the company of holy men 

I have heard spiritual teaching 

Evil ones saw me and looked on 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara 

Let the evil ones burn up with hatred. 

Like coals in a brazier 



48 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


34 


0 my King, 

Why did you bear enmity against me*^ 
Why do you play the prickly cactus‘s 
Now I have left the palace 
And Its lofty towers 

1 no longer live m your city 

I have renounced antimony and tilak 
And donned the ochre robe 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara , 
He turned the poison into nectar 

35 


Sister, 

If the King of the House of Sisodiya^^ rages 
What can he do*? 

I shall continue to sing the glories of Govind 

If the King become angry 

He may keep his kingdom, and welcome ,^5 

But if Han becomes angry 

I shall lose lustre like a withering flower 

I do not observe the rules of worldly decorum 

Fearlessly, Sister will I beat the drum 

O my companion, I will sail the boat 

Of the Name of Shyam 

And cross the Ocean of Becoming 

Mira has taken refuge with the dusky Gindhara, 

Sister, she will keep close to those lotus feet 

36 


I donned anklets and danced 
The people said ‘ Mira is mad ” 

My mother-in-law declared 

That I had ruined the family s reputation 

The King sent me a cup of poison 

Which I drank with a smile 

I have offered body and mind 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


49 


To the feet of Han, 

And will drink the nectar of His holy sight 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 
My Lord, to Thee^® will I go for refuge 


Testing 

37 

I am dyed deep in the love of Shyam, 

My King, dyed deep in the love of Shyam 
I danced before the holy men. 

Beating the drum 

People think am mad over Madan, 

That love of Shyam has driven me silly 
The King sent me a cup of poison 
Which I gulped down without even a look 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 

His love IS true, birth after birth 

38 

I knew the Queen*"^ had sent me poison 

When gold is placed in fire 

It emerges shining like the sun 

I have thrown away worldly shame 

As one throws away dirty water 

You observe purdah in your place, my Queen, 

But I am just a poor mad girl 

An arrow from the quiver of love 

Has pierced my heart and driven me crazy 

I offer my body and mind 

As a sacrifice to all holy men. 

And I hug closely those lotus feet 

The Lord has taken®® Mira into his protection. 

Knowing her to be His servant 



50 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


39 

Sister, I will sing the glories of Govind 
If the King shows displeasure 
I can leave his kingdom, 

But if Han shows displeasure 
Whither can I retreat*? 

The King sent me a cup of poison 
And I accepted it as nectar, 

As the very foot- wash of the Lord ** 

He sent me a black serpent. 

Hidden in a basket. 

And I worshipped it 

As the black stone that embodies Vishnu 
Now Mira has gone veritably mad with love. 
She has obtained Shyam for her bridegroom 

40 

This love. Sister, is a love that endures 

I have drunk from the cup of nectar 

And It has set me in a spin 

They cannot sober me, however they try 

The King sent a snake in a basket 

And they gave it to the Princess of Merata®^ 

To put on her neck 

Mira donned it smiling. 

Thinking “This is my best necklace 
The King prepared a cup of poison 
Which they gave to the princess to drink 
She drank it up 

Like the foot-wash of the Lord, 

Singing the glories of Govind 
I have drunk from the cup 
Of the Holy Name, 

And nothing else pleases me 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara, 

His love is paint that does not peel 



Devotional Poems of IVGra Bai 


41 

Mira has been singing the glones of Govind 
And IS immersed in joy 
The Kmg sent a snake m a basket 
They came and placed it m Mira’s hand 
I washed and came to look at it. 

And behold ’ 

It was the Black Stone of Vishnu 
The Kmg sent a cup of poison, 

But my Lord converted it into nectar 
When I washed my hand and drank. 

Behold ^ It was nectar 

The Kmg sent a mattress of thorns, 

Saying “Give that to Mira to sleep upon ” 
When evening came and Mira lay down. 
Behold ’ It was a bed of flowers 
Mira’s Lord ever stands as her helper 
And preserves her from dangers 
She wanders about recklessly. 

Drunk in adoration, 

Ofienng herself to Gindhara in total sacrifice 

42 

O Sister without Han I cannot live 
My mother-in-law fights with me. 

My sister-in-law scolds me. 

The King is permanently m a rage 
They have bolted my door 
And mounted a guard outside it 
Why should I abandon my ancient love 
Inherited from earlier births'^ 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 
And she will be satisfied with nothing else 



52 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Sufferings in Absence 
43 

I do not know how to meet my Lord 
He came into my courtyard and went. 

And I only know that I missed Him 
1 spend days in search. 

Scanning the road night and day 
Han came into my courtyard. 

But, wretch that I am, 

I was asleep 

The pam of absence bums my bewildered heart 
And gives me no rest 
O Servant Mira, 

Whoso once meets Lai Giridhara 
Should never let go 


44 


0 Jogi,®* I scan the road 
Searching for Thee day and night 

My feet will not tread tho difficult path 
It is strange, and has many pitfalls 
A Jogi came to the city. 

But found not love in my heart and left 
Artless as I was, 

1 failed to entrap and hold Him 

Since then I have searched for many days. 

But still He has not returned 

Come and quench the longing in my heart, 

A veritable fire is raging in my body 

Either the Jogi is no longer alive 

Or else He has forgotten me completely 

What can I do‘> where shall I go*^ 

Sister, tears have rendered my eyes useless 
My Lord, I long for Thee in my heart. 
Come, knowing me to be Thine 
Mira feels abandoned and perplexed 
Without Thee, she can only pant and sigh 



Devotional Poems of IVfira Bai 


53 


45 

My thirsty eyes are longung for His sight 
Whole days have I passed. Sister, 

In scanning the road 

The pain in my eyes is great 

A cuckoo has been smging from a branch. 

And Its song has pierced me deeply “ 

The elders speak bitter words 
And crack jokes at my expense 
But Mira is sold into Han’s hands. 

His slave for birth upon birth 


46 


0 Jogi, do not depart, 

1 pray you, do not depart 

Behold, I fall at Your feet. Your slave 

Strange is the path of love and devotion > 

Explain to me its intricacies 

Before You depart 

I am laying a pyre of fragrant aloe 

And sandalwood 

Light It with Your own hand 

Before You depart 

When I am burnt to a heap of ashes. 

Smear them on Your body 
Before You depart 

Says Mira to her Lord, the courtly Gindhara, 
Let my light dissolve in Your light 
Before You depart 


47 

0 Gindhara Lai, You enjoyed a feast 
Servant Mira begged a boon. 

And my dear Krishna showed His compassion 
He who protects and nounshes His servants 
Accepted a savoury dish 

1 held the platter before Him 



54 


Derotional Poems of Mira Bai 


While Giridhara feasted royally 
Servant Mira will take refuge with Thee, 
Grant her contentment soon 


48 

Do not go off and abandon me, my Lord 
Weak woman as I am, 

Giridhara is my strength 

He IS my Master 

I am quite without merit 

While Giridhara possesses every virtue 

His presence bejewels my heart 

You are the Saviour of the World 

And the remover of all affliction 

You came to the rescue of the elephant 

I place my ruined life 

In the shadow of Your protection 

Where else could I go, O King of Braj"^ 

Mira recognizes no other Master, 

Now spare her from further ignominy 

49 


Where are You going. 

Having lit the flames of love? 

Without Your sight I enjoy no repose. 
Life IS suffocating and will not last 
I will become a wandering Jogmi 
For Your sake. 

Or end my life beneath the saw of Kashi 

50 

0 my Beloved, stay before my eyes 
Do not forget me, 

1 am drowning in the Ocean of Becoming, 
Remember me soon 

The King has sent me a cup of poison. 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


55 


Grant the boon that it may become nectar 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Girdhara, 

Do not leave me when once we have met 

51 


What shall I say to you, 

0 my Shyam Gindhara’ 

My love is ancient 

And runs from former births. 

Do not abandon me, Giridhara 

1 offer myself in unconditional sacrifice, my darling. 
When I behold Thy beautiful face 

Come into my courtyard, Giridhara, 

The women are singing auspicious hymns 
1 have set aside a square for Thy welcome. 

Heaped with the pearls of my tears 
I cast myself before Thee, body and mind 
Servant Mira takes refuge at Thy feet 
For Thy sake she has remained a virgin 
From birth to birth 


Reproaches 

52 

Sister, behold how Han has hardened His heart' 
He said He would come, 

But has not done so 

That was His promise when He went 

Food, drink and my surroundings. 

Are all forgotten 
Why does my life go on*^ 

Thy actions belie Thy words, my Master, 

How couldst Thou have forgotten me'^ 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara 
She says Without Thee I am heart-broken 



56 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


53 


To fall in love with a Jogi 
Is to court pain 

I loved, but it has brought me no joy. 

My sister 

The Jogi befriends no one 
Until I meet Thee again, 

I shall have no rest, day or night 
Never again in this world 
Have I beheld beauty like Thine 
Mira says My Lord, when shall we meet? 
Great will be the joy of that meeting 

54 


To love a Jogi brings pain 
He speaks sweet words 
When you are with him. 

But then He forgets you and goes 
Sister, He snaps the ties of love 
As you might pluck a sprig of jasmine 
Says Mira My Lord, 

Without Thy sight my heart grieves sorely 

55 

One day, perhaps, you will remember me. 

My wandering Krishna,®® so aloof 
You took up your seat 
In motionless contemplation. 

As is proper on the path of devotion 
I thought You would take me when You went. 
But You left me behind in the lurch 
You do not see a Jogi come, 

Y ou do not see him go 

Who can say that a Jogi is his friend‘d 

Says Mira O my courtly Gindhara, 

My mind has gone to your feet 



Deyotional Poems of Mira Bai 


57 


56 

0 Mohan, I know your ways of lo^ e. 
Know them well 

Mine IS the Path of Love and Devotion, 

1 know no other 

Why, having first plied me with nectar. 
Do you serve me with poison now*^ 
Where did you learn manners like this? 
Mira’s Lord is Han, the Indestructible 
He is the true friend of His devotees 

57 

Let Him go, let Him go, my companion > 
To whom is a Jogi a friend*? 

He remains ever indifferent to me. 
Utterly peculiar in his behaviour 
He seems to speak sweetly. 

But never gives His love 
I thought the affair would succeed. 

But He left me®® half-way and went off 
Mira’s Lord is the dehghtful Shyam, 
Dear because the object of her love ' 

58 


Come, Jogi, smile and talk. 

Your lofty indifference®® is a sham 

I’ve told the whole world now, Manamohan,®i 

To the beat of a drum 

Come, You with the deer-skm 

And the ash-smeared body — 

Just tell the people the truth 

Thy face has the beauty of a new-born®^ lotus, 

I stand and gaze at Thy cheeks 

I have neither beads, nor ashes. 

Nor horn nor seli 

Open Thy mouth, O Silent One. 

Do not wander from door to door. 



58 


Devotimial Poems of Mira Bai 


Flaunting Thy youth and piercing eyes 
Mira’s Lord is Han, the Indestructible 
She has sold herself in slavery to Him 
Without accepting a fee 


59 

0 Knshna,«s o All-Pervading One, 

My love is for Thee alone 

When love has once set in, my dearest. 

Do not break it off, 

But go on increasing Thy affection instead 
Had I known what pam arose from love, 

My dearest, 

1 would have proclaimed “Let no one love” 
All over the town with an enormous drum 
Do not make friends with fools 

Sister, leave that treacherous dish alone •“ 
Now they are warm, now cold. 

Now your accomplice, now your enemy 
To love is madness 

But those who, having once given their love. 
Retract it later, are cruel 
He IS a rare hero who loves on. 

Trampling all opposition underfoot 
Thou art strong like a well-cemented terrace. 
And I am weak like a wall of sand 
How can I now revive that love 
I enjoyed in former births'^ 

You may plant in the same place 
A mango and an acacia, 

But the one will still yield a sweet drink 

And the other thorns 

Love With the fickle-minded 

Is like a thin stream descending from a height 

It flows freely and froths much 

But soon announces its exhaustion 

Now the rainy months have come 

And the cry of the peacock is heard 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


59 


Caught in the puffs of a divine breeze 
Mira has been wafted away 
To join the devotees of Han 


60 


0 Giridhara, 

Why hast Thou become angry with me*? 
Recount some of my faults, 

1 am eager to hear 

I have been Thy slave for many births 
And Thou art my excellent Master 
Says Mira O my Lord, 

0 Gmdhara the courtly one, 

1 take Thy Name and Thine alone 


Hymns of Praise 
61 

Han, 

Thou didst remove the afBiictions of Thy devotees 
Thou didst spare the shame of Draupadi®® 

By continually lengthening her dress 

Thou didst assume the form of a Man-Lion 

To save Thy devotee Prahlad 

Thou didst save the Elephant from drowning 

Mira is the servant of Lai Giridhara 

He has removed all my afflictions 

62 


Take my arm immediately. 

If only to preserve Thine own reputation 

0 Giridhara they call Thee 
The Refuge of the Afflicted 

Thou hast promised to save the fallen 

1 am plunged in the ocean of transmigration 
Without a support 



60 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Without Thee, I shall suffer a mighty disaster 
Thou savest Thy devotees from their af9ictions 
In every age, 

Appearing before them to grant them release 
Mira has taken refuge with Thee, 

And is grasping Thy feet 
Redeem Thy pledge,’'* O King 

63 

Without Han, behold my wretched condition 
They say that Thou art my protector 
And I Thy servant 

I have practised remembrance of Thy Name 

In my heart, day and night 

Again and again I call upon Thee 

In grievous affliction 

This world is a threatening sea. 

Surrounding me on every side 
My boat has broken. 

Hoist the sail quickly 
Before it sinks 

This forlorn one waits anxiously for her Lord, 

Grant her Thy proximity 

Servant Mira repeats “Ram Ram'”^® 

I take refuge in Thee alone 


64 

My Lord, You have inspired me with love. 

Where have You now gone‘> 

You have abandoned me. Your faithful companion. 

Having ht the flame of love 

You have set the boat of love in motion 

And abandoned it on the ocean of longing 

My Lord, when can I meet You‘> 

Without You, I cannot survive 

65 

The Charmer of Hearts has gone. 

Having caught me in the noose of love 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


61 


On the bough of a mango tree 
A cuckoo IS pouring forth her plaintive song 
The world just laughs. 

But for me it is death 
I tramp the forests 

In desolation at the absence of the Beloved 
Let me die, 

Let me perish in the saw at Kashi 
Mira’s Lord is Han, the Indestructible 
Thou art my Master and I Thy servant 

66 

Sister, Han will not speak to me. 

Why does not my wretched breath 
Abandon my body'^ 

The night passed 

And I neither removed my veil nor spoke ’’ 

An age has passed without converse. 

How can I prosper in conditions like this‘s 
I heard that Han would come in the ’•amy season 
The nights were thick with darkness. 

Lightning flashed 

And I would count the hours till dawn 
Servant Mira is dyed in the love of Shyam 
Her whole life passes in longing 

67 


I am invaded by memories 

Of the conduct of the supremely affectionate Krishna 

Krishna belongs to me 

And I belong to Him 

Without Him, nothing pleases me 

He said He would come but has not appeared, 

My heart is deeply distraught 
My only desire, O Krishna, 

Is to enjoy vision of Thee 

When will Han grant me His holy sight‘d 



62 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Deep IS my love for those lotus feet. 

And without His sight I suffer greatly 
When Mira’s Lord grants her His sight 
Her joy will be beyond description 

68 

My darkling Beloved has gone abroad 
My lost one has not returned 
Or even sent me a message 
I have put off my jewelry 
And shaved my hair 

For Thy sake have I donned the orange robe 
And gone forth searching the four quarters 
Says Mira O my Lord Shyam, 

Unless I can be with Thee, 

My birth and life are but an affliction 

69 


0 my companion. 

Without Shyam I cannot survive 
Charmed by Thy beauty, O my Beloved, 

1 offer Thee my body, mind and life 

I have lost all appetite for food and drink 
And my eyes have gone dim 

0 Muran,™ day and night 

1 dream of meeting Thee, 

When shall I have Thy sight‘d 
Days and nights pass 

As I call upon Thee 
Says Mira O Han, 

Without Thee my life flickers feebly on 

70 


I am mad with love 

And no one understands my plight 

Only the wounded 

Understand the agonies of the wounded. 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


63 


When a fire rages in the heart 

Only the jeweller knows the value of the jewel. 

Not the one who lets it go 

In pain I wandered from door to door. 

But could not find a doctor 
Says Mira Harken, my Master, 

Mira’s pain will subside 

When Shyam comes as the doctor 

71 


Without my beloved Master 
I cannot live 
Body, mind and life 
Have I given to the Beloved 
Fascinated by His beauty, 

I gaze down the road 
Night and day 

Says Mira My Lord, accept your servant — 
It IS all she asks 


72 

The link between me and Shyam 
Cannot be broken 
I went yellow as the autumn leaf 
And the people thought I had jaundice 
My father sent for the doctor. 

Who felt my pulse 

It was my heart that was breaking. 

But the doctor did not know the secret 
My Lord, Mira is distressed in Your absence. 
Come and grant her Your sight 

73 


Who can understand the grief 

Of a woman parted from her beloved’ 

Only one who has felt the pangs of absence. 
Or perhaps a devotee 



64 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


The physician is present within the patient 
Only the physician knows the remedy 
The dagger®^ of the absence of the Beloved 
Has pierced my breast 
Without Han, all pleasures are as dust 
I am like a mad cow roaming the forest, 
Who can think only of her lost calf 
The Chatak dreams of the rain of Swati,®* 
Crying “Lord, Lord”®® in great distress 
The world is all thorns, 

A veritable garbage-heap. 

And no one sees my pain 

Krishna is Mira’s Lord and Master 

She could not find another if she sought ®® 

74 

Without Krishna I cannot sleep 
Tortured by longing, I cannot sleep. 

And the fire of love 

Drives me to wander hither and thither 
Without the light of the Beloved 
My house is dark. 

And lamps do not please me 

Without the Beloved my bed is uninviting 

And I pass the nights awake 

When will my Beloved return home‘s 

The frogs are croaking, the peacock’s cry 

And the cuckoo’s song are heard 

Low black clouds are gathering. 

Lightning flashes, stirring fear in the heart 

My eyes fill with tears 

What shall I do‘> Where shall I go*^ 

Who can quench my pain‘d 
My body has been bitten 
By the snake of “absence”. 

And my life is ebbing away 
With every beat of the heart 
Fetch the herb quickly 



Derotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Which of my companions 

Will come bringing the Beloved to meet me*^ 

My Lord when will you come 

To meet your Mira‘S 

Manamohan, the Charmer of Hearts, 

Fills me with delight When, my Lord, 

Will you come to laugh and talk with me*^ 

75 

Sleep has not visited me the whole night. 

Will the dawn ever come*^ 

0 my companion. 

Once I awoke with a start from a dream 
Now the remembrance of that vision 
Never fades 

My life IS ebbing as I choke and sigh, 

When will the Lord of the Afflicted come*^ 

1 have lost my senses and gone mad. 

But the Lord knows my secret 

He who deals out life and death 
Knows the secret of Mira’s pain 

76 

How can I finish a letter 

When I cannot even write‘s 

My hand trembles when I take up the pen 

And my eyes flood with tears 

When I want to say anything 

I cannot speak 

My heart is sore afraid 

You have beheld my plight 

Go to Han, and beg of Mira’s Lord, 

The courtly Giridhara, 

That He may keep a place for her 
At His lotus feet 


77 

In the absence of the Beloved 

The sports of Hofis’ leave a bitter taste 



66 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


The whole village seems mournful. 

Mournful one’s'’ bed and house 

This abandoned one wanders about mournfully 

Without her Beloved 

The Beloved has left her and gone off, 

Leaving her afflicted with the pain of absence 
Do not keep travelling from place to place. 

My anxiety is heavy 
I have blurred the lines on my fingers 
With counting O Murari,®^ come’ 

They are playing the flutes and drums 
And the one-stringed lute 
Spring has come, but the Beloved has not 
My pain grows deeper. 

Why have you forgotten me, Shyam‘> 

O Gindhara, I stand before You in supplication 
Spare my shame 

Says Mira O Madhav,®* O my Master, 

For Thy sake have I preserved virginity 
Birth after birth Come to my side 
My mind has taken full refuge in Thee 

78 


I take no pleasure in Hoh 
Without the presence of my Beloved 
My house and its courtyard 
Are alike repellent 

Sister, the place of honour in my house 
Is filled with lamps®^ 

To honour my distant Lord 
My empty bed seems like a snake 
Sleep will not come to my eyes. 

How will the night pass'> 

How long have I been standing 

Gazing down the road‘s 

The pain of absence keeps me awake 

Night and day 

To whom can I recount 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


67 


The sufferings of my mind*^ 

My heart remains uneasy. 

When will the Beloved come*^ 

I see no dear soul 
Kind enough to take a message 
When will I have the chance 
To smile and embrace the Beloved 
Then would Mira sing the songs of Holi 

80 

The Beloved has abandoned me. 

With whom could I play Holp®® 

I have taken off all gems and pearls 
And donned the yogi’s beads 
Neither food nor house please me. 

The Beloved has driven me mad 
Why did He subject me 
To the pain of absence*^ 

If You are now making love to another 
Why did You make love to me first'’ 

Many days have passed 
And still He has not come 
O my companion, I am disturbed 
Who can be holding Him back'’ 

Without Shyam my life-force shrivels and contracts 
Like a plant with water 
O my Master, 

Mira has been Thy servant birth after birth. 

Grant her Thy sight 

Without Thy sight 

She can only stand in sorrow 


81 

See, the tumbling clouds hove come. 

But they have not brought a message from Han 
The songs of the frog, the peacock. 

The papiha and the koil are heard 
All is thick darkness 



68 


Derotional Poems of JVdDra Bai 


When suddenly the lightning flashes. 
Causing great trepidation 
To her whose Beloved is absent 
Thunder rolls, 

A sweet, soft breeze sets in. 

With steady rain 

Now the snake of “absence” 

Bites really hard 

Han has captured Mira’s heart 

82 

O Shyam, I saw a ram-cloud bursting. 

And burst into tears myself 

The clouds massed black and yellow. 

And rained for two hours on end 
Wherever I look there is water, water 
Green herbage has covered the thirsty earth 
My Beloved has gone abroad. 

And I have become drenched 
Standing at the door waiting for Him 
Mira says O my Master, the eternal Han, 
Fulfil the obligations of sincere love 


In the Throes of Longing 
83 

Whence arose those feelings of spite 
That you suddenly remembered, O Papiha 
I was sleeping in my house 
When your cry came “Darling, darling” 

It was salt on my wounds, 

An axe®s laid at my heart 
You were perched on the branch 
Of a tall tree. 

Singing at the top of your voice 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara, 

She has laid her mind at His feet 



Deyotional Poems of Mora Bai 


69 


84 


0 Papiha, 

Do not call out for the Beloved 

If one in the throes of absence should hear you 

She would twist off your wings 

And throw them away 

1 will get them to cut off your beak 
And will pour black salt on the wound 
I belong to the Beloved 

And He belongs to me alone 
Who are you to call Him “darhng”*^ 

Yet if I should meet the Beloved today 

Your voice would sound sweet 

I would gild your beak 

And make you my pet 

I will write the Beloved a letter 

Take it for me, friend crow 

Tell the Beloved 

That His abandoned one is not eating 
Servant Mira is in distress. 

Passing the time calling out for the Beloved 
Come quickly O Master, O Inner Ruler, 
Without Thee I cannot survive 

85 


0 my companion. 

My “Charmer of Hearts” has not come 
Perhaps he has taken up the life 
Of a holy man 

Or has He simply forgotten the way*^ 

What shall I do*? Where shall I go 
Now the pain of absence is deeply disturbing 
Servant Mira is thirsty for Thy sight 
Her mind has gone to the feet of Han 

86 

1 sit up awake while the world sleeps 

The abandoned one sits in the pleasure-palace. 



70 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Threading the pearls of her tears 
Just such an abandoned one once I saw 
Threading a necklace from her tears 
I pass the night counting the stars 
Awaiting the hours of joy 
Mira says O my Lord Gindhara, 

Come, for this separation*^ must end 

87 

Friend, I have lost all sleep 
I spend the whole night 
Watching and waiting for the Beloved 
My companions came to lecture me, 

But my mind would not listen 
Without seeing Him I cannot rest. 

Yet I will not be angry 

My body is thin, I am greatly distracted, 

My lips keep repeating the word “darling” 

You did not understand 

The agonies I suffered in separation. 

The pain of my heart 

The chatak bird thinks only of the cloud. 

The stranded fish thinks only of the sea 
Mira, too, is abandoned and distracted 
She has lost consciousness of her surroundings 

88 

That dark form has entered my heart 
I meditate on Gindhara night and day. 

And Mohan surely abides in my heart 
I am bitten by the snake of love of Shyam 
And stand utterly bewildered 
Says Mira O my Master, 

When will You come ? 

Every day finds me filled with love anew 

89 

Sister, without the Lord I cannot carry on 
My life-force is failing. 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


71 


Without Han I cannot carry on 
The tortoise and the frog live in water. 

And from water were they born 
But greater is the fish 

Take him from water and he immediately dies 

The log has fallen in the forest 

And the weevils®^ are attacking it savagely 

But if the Lord came 

And threw it into the fire. 

Behold * It would burn to ashes 
I wander from wood to wood. 

Hardly retaining consciousness 
Grant me Thy sight but once 
And all my evils will cease 
I have turned yellow as a sear leaf 
And am visited with sore pain 

0 Lai Giridhara, this is Thy servant Mira 
Through meeting Thee she has now found joy 

90 

Sister’ Without Hari, how can I live*? 

Without Shyam I have gone crazy. 

My mind is like wood attacked by weevils 

The pain of love is devouring me 

And no medicine avails 

When the fish is sundered from the water 

It flaps feebly and dies 

1 search endlessly for Shyam in the forests. 
Drawn on by the sound of the flute 

Says Mira O Lai Giridhara, my Master, 
Come quickly to my side 


91 

My companion, a deep longing to meet Shyam 
Has arisen within me 
I toss and turn and find no ease, 

The fire ot ‘absence” has set in 
I call out for the Belc ved 



72 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bm 


Night and day, abandoning worldly shame 
And family custom 

The snake of separation has bitten my heart, 
And now it pumps jets of poison 
Mira is miserable and utterly bewildered, 
Her desire for Shyam is deep 


92 

Shyam, without Thee I cannot sleep 
Every second seems many an age. 

Every moment I am tortured by separation 
Without the Beloved*® I remain in tlarkness. 

Neither lamps nor palaces please me 

A bed of jfiowers seems abed ofihoins 

And I pass my nights awake 

To whom can I speak 

Who would believe me 

Who would have faith in my words ^ 

The Beloved is a snake 
Who has bitten my hand. 

And my life is ebbing with every pulse 
I hear the frog’s croaking, the peacock’s cry 
And the song of the koil and paplha 
Dark low clouds have gathered. 

The lightning’s flash inspires terror 

0 Krishna,^®® 

Is there any loving soul in the world 
Who will ease my pain 
Mira’s Lord is Han, the Indestructible 
His sight would refresh her eyes 

93 

1 have sacrificed my life 
Unto the beautiful Shyam 
For Thy sake, O Shyam, 

I have abandoned worldly shame and family custom 

Without His sight I find no rest 

And streams of tears fall from my eyes 



I>evof:ional Poems of NUra Bm 


To whom could I speak ^ 

Who could assuage my pain 
The river of separation is a powerful stream 
Says Mira Harken, Lord, grant me Thy sight. 
For Thy feet are my only support 

94 

0 Shyam, hear my pitiful prayer 

1 will remain Thy faithful servant 

I am mad with desire for Thy sigat 

And the plague of separation has attacked me 

For Thy sake I will become a Jogini 

And wander from city to city 

I will seek Thee m every nook 

I will don ashes and deer-skin. 

And will veritably reduce this body to ashes 
K.rishna,ioi the Indestructible, has not yet come 
I will wander from wood to wood. 

Weeping and calling out 

0 Giridhara, 

Come to the side of Thy devotee Mira, 

It will end her pam and bring abundant joy 
Now there is peace m my breast. 

Through and through 
My wanderings are at an end 

1 shall remain at Thy feet. 

Thy servant for ever 


95 

Come straight away to my house,!®® 

O my Beloved 

Thou art mine and I am Thine 
I, Thy devotee, await Thee expectantly. 
Gazing eagerly down the road 
Time has passed. 

And still Thou hast not come 
Hast Thou fallen in love 
With my messenger 



74 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Says Mira O my Master, 

When wilt Thou come 

Without Thy sight the days are hard 

96 

Come to my house, O Lord of the Universe ’ 
My body is in pain, my breath burning 
Come and extinguish the fire of separation 
I spend the nights roving about in tears 
Appetite and sleep have left me. 

But my shameless life clings on 
Grant me happiness, do not desolate me 
Delay no longer. 

Thy abandoned Mira is in sore straits 

97 


0 Jogi, 

If You would but grant me Your sight. 

Great would be my joy 

Otherwise life on earth is only pain, 

A continuous suffering in Your absence. 
Day and night 

My sufferings have driven me mad, 

1 have tramped the whole country through 
Mira has been Your true servant. 

Now her black hair has turned white 


98 


Come to my house, O Jogi, 

With Thy ear-rings. Thy beads 
And Thy ash-smeared body 
Without Thy sight I feel no rest 
I am happy neither in the house 
Nor the courtyard 

Han, the Indestructible is Mira ^ 1 o-i. 
Come and grant me Thv bi^m 



DeTotional Poems of Mira Bai 


75 


99 


Come, O Charmer of Hearts, 

1 am waiting expectantly 
I do not touch food or drink. 

Nor do my eyelids close in sleep 
In Thy absence I can enjoy nothing 
And my heart is deeply despondent 
Without Thee, Mira has gone demented 
Do not leave her supportless 

100 


Come, Charmer of Hearts, 

For Your speech is sweet 

0 Krishna, did You ever rightly value 
My childhood love ? 

Without Your sight I feel no ease. 

My mind swings this way and that 
Mira says I am Yours 

1 will proclaim this, with Your permission. 
To the beat of a drum 


101 

My darling, grant me Your sight, 

I cannot exist without You 

Life without You 

Is like a pond without a lotus. 

Or a night without the moon 
I pass the nights in deep distress. 

The pain of absence eats my heart 
No food by day, no sleep by night. 

No words pass my lips either 

Who will listen to me 

To whom can I speak 

Come, mj Beloved, and quench my pain 

Why do You torment me, O Inner Ruler 

If You came, my pain would go 

Mira is Your servant. 

Her Love^o^ has run for many births 



76 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


102 


Without Thy sight 
I cannot rest a minute 
My house looks ugly, 

Sleep deserts me. 

And I am plagued by the sense of absence 
I wander about like a wounded thing 
And no one knows my pain 
My life is ebbing, I wither. 

My eyes are blurred with tears 
I stand and stand in expectation. 

Gazing down Thy path 

Says Mira When shall I meet Y ou. 

My Lord ? To meet You 
Would bring joy 


103 


Without Thy sight 

Sorrow attends my eyes 

When I fancy I hear Thy words. 

My heart trembles 
Sweet is Thy voice 

To whom can I explain my sufferings 

I am being mangled in the jaws 

Of the circular saw of “pain of absence” 

0 Han, I gaze down Thy path, 

1 experience no peace 

And a night seems like half a year 

I toss and turn in Thy absence 

And peace and joy are gone 

Says Mira My Lord, when will You come 

Your coming will end my sorrows 

And bring joy 


104 

Why do You torment me 

For Your sake I abandoned the world 

And my family 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bii 


77 


Why do You now forget me 
You lit the fire of the pain of absence. 
But You have not returned to put it out 
You cannot escape me now, Murari, 

I have come forward to grasp Your feet 
Mira has been Thy slave for many births 
Thou hast promised to save Thy devotees. 
Redeem Thy pledge 


105 

My love for Thee has set in deeply, 

0 courtly Son of Nand 

Having heard the music of Thy flute 

1 have forgotten family and home 
When the fish is dying on the bank 
The water knows nothing of its pain 
The moth is burnt to ashes 

And the flame knows not its agonies 
Says Mira O Shyam, my Master, 

Without Thee I remain in embodied existence, 
But can I be said to live 


106 

Thou art my companion of many births, 
I do not forget Thee day or night 
Without Thee I can enjoy no peace. 

My heart knows it well 
I climbed a high place 
To scan Thy path 

I suffered sorely and my eyes grew red 
False IS the ocean of transmigration, 
False IS bondage to the world, 

False all family ties 
I gaze at Thy form every moment 
And feel the intoxication of Thy beauty 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 
Her mind is dyed in the feet of Han 



78 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


107 

My beloved, think of me as Thou wilt, 

I have no other refuge but Thee, 

Grant me Thy grace 
I do not eat by day 
Or sleep by night 

My body is wasting away every moment 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara 
Come to her. 

And do not forsake her again 

108 

Deep IS my longing to meet with Shyam 
Every day I rise early 
And wait for Him in expectation 
Many days have passed in torment, 

I am caught in the net of longing 

Show me Thy compassion soon, my Master, 

Am I not Thy slave 

My weary eyes long for Thy sight, 

My breath will hardly emerge from my body 
Day and night my only thought is 
“When will Han keep me by His side 
Mine IS a love that will not lapse. 

Why do you still make mischief 

0 Master of Mira, 

When will You come 'f 

Your coming will fulfil all my desires 

109 

Come to my house, my darling, my Beloved 

1 will offer You my eyes 
As a carpet to walk upon. 

My heart as a couch. 

And will seat You ensconced upon my head 
O my guest. 

Thy coming will benefit me greatly. 



Devotional Poems of ]\^ra Bai 


7 ' 


For Thy mission is salvation from the world 
Thou hast rescued Thy devotees 
From various evil plights. 

And assured them the rewards 
Of all their pious deeds 

Mira says O my Master, the courtly Giridhara, 
Grasp my arm and spare my shame 

110 


0 my companion, 

When will my Beloved come"^ 

Surely the lotus feet of the courtly Giridhara 
Will grant me joy. 

For I have fastened my eyes upon them 
Deep is my desire to see Thee, 

To behold Thy face 
My wits are disturbed. 

My very life insecure. 

Come quickly to relieve ray pain 

Says Mira O my Master, the courtly Giridhara, 

Without Thee my sufferings are great 

111 

Think of me as Thou wilt, 

1 am gazing down Thy path 
Every moment Grant me Thy sight 
I am full of defects. 

But consider not my defects 
I am a slave to Thy lotus feet. 

Come to me and do not depart 
Says Mira I have taken refuge 
With the true Teacher, 

And have applied my mind 
To the feet of Han 


112 

Come to my house, my Beloved, my dearest 
Without Thee, the whole world tastes bitter 



80 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


I will ofFef you my body, my mmd 
And my worldly possessions. 

And will perform Thy worship 
Thou art a vast of ocean of virtues 
And I a mass of defects 
I am worthless, without a single grace, 

But Thou art forgiving 

Says Mira My master, when will You come*^ 
Without You my eyes feel sore pain 

113 

0 Krishna, offering myself completely m sacrifice, 

1 beg of You to come to my street 
Without Thy sight I feel no ease 
And can only gaze down Thy path 
Who IS Your new lady-love. 

Dearer to You than P 

Be compassionate and grant me Thy sight. 

Overlooking all my faults 

O Murari, Thou an supremely compassionate 

To those who take refuge at Thy feet 

Save me from the ocean of transmigration 

Mira is the slave of Thy feet 

She offers herself in sacrifice again and again 

114 

Come to my house, O Krishna, 

Thy coming will bring peace 
Great will be my joy if I meet Thee, 

And all my desires will be fulfilled 
Thou and I are one. 

Like the sun and its heat 

Mira’s heart cares for nothing else. 

It only wants the beautiful Shyam 

115 

O Beloved, grant me Thy sight 
Again and again I call out to Thee, 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


81 


Grant me Thy grace 
In the hot weather of late May 
The land is dessicated, the birds suffer 
As May gives way to June, 

The peacock cries out piteously 
And the cuckoo wails for the clouds 
When the rams set in. 

The women observe the Tij festival 
In the month of Bhadon 
The rivers swirl — 

No one absents themselves then 
In the month of Kwar, 

The oyster-shells hanker for ram 
In the month of Karttik 
People worship in the temple. 

But in my case, 

Thou art my only divinity 
Cold are the days of Margashirsh, 

So come quickly to protect me 

In the month of Paush 

The earth is covered with thick frost, 

Come Yourself to see it 

In the month of Magh 

They celebrate Vasant Pancham! 

In Phalgun they sing songs 

They celebrate Holi with mirth and games 

And bum whole woods in bonfires 

In the month of Chaitra 

Longing rises m the heart— 

Grant me Thy sight 
In the month of Vaishakh 
The trees burst into blossom. 

And the cuckoo sings his plaintive song 
The day has passed m driving off crows'^* 
And I have also consulted the astrologers 
Mira is abandoned and miserable 
When will she have His sight*^^“ 



82 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


116 


O Jogi, come to this land 
Let me see Thee with my eyes. 

And run to prostrate before Thee 
With my humble petition 
The rainy season has come. 

Dry land, nvers and tanks 

Are all flooded 

Who IS holding You back, 

A prisoner of love‘s 

Your abandoned one is deeply distraught 
The rainy season is now long over. 

But nothing hinders my power to weep 

Just alter direction 

And come to our city 

That beautiful form 

Has taken up its station in my heart. 

And I can hardly live any longer 
Mira has no other possession but Thee 
Come to her and grant her Thy sight 

117 

Take my humble petition to the Jogi 

0 my companion, the Jogi is very wise 
Even Shiv and Shesh^i* meditate upon Him 

1 will come ’ I will not remain 

In a distant place, parted from the Beloved 

0 my protector, be gracious 
And keep me by Thy side 
My Dearest, 

1 will don the beads, ear-rings and belt. 

And will take the begging-bowl m my hands 
I will become a wandering Jogini, 

And will search long ages 
Till I enjoy Thy presence at last 
The Beloved said He would come 
In the rainy season 
He made many promises. 



Devotional Poems of Miri Bil 


85 


But I have blurred the lines on my fingers 
Counting the days 
I have fallen yellow, my Dearest, 

On account of the absence of the Beloved, 

A strange livery for a girl m her youth 
Servant Mira, havmg worshipped Krishna, 

Has offered Him her body and mind 

118 

How long have I been standmg 
Waiting expectantly and ready for service? 
Deign to vouchsafe me a glance, 

0 Friend of the Afflicted 

My relatives have turned against me 
And find my conduct offensive 

1 have no one to call my own 
But thee 

My boat has shuddered*!®^ in mid-sea 
And IS now at a standstill 
No peace by day, no sleep by mght 
I stand ever in expiectation. 

And am withering away 

The arrow of “absence” has pierced my heart. 
And I cannot forget Thee for a moment 
You saved Ahaly^, turned to stone. 

When you found her m the woods 
Is It such a burden to raise Mira, 

Scarcely a tenth of her weight 

119 

Come to my house, stranger t 
Bodily pain will go, joy will dawn 
Let us sing hymns together! 

The peacock has heard the thunder 
And is dancing in ecstasy ! 

Come to my courtyard nowt 
The lotus expands 



84 


Devotional Poraas of Mira Bai 


And great will be my joy, too. 

When I can see Thee 
O my companion, I will feel cool 
To the very pores of my skin 
Come to my courtyard, Mohan 
O Support of Thy Bhaktas, 

Do not neglect Thy promise to me, 
Mira is desolate, O courtly Giridhara! 
Come to her. 

And end her strife and pain. 


120 

Come to my house and talk to me, 

0 Shyam 

1 shall be filled with joy and vigour. 
And will offer myself, mind and body. 
I am Thy loyal servant. 

Pray do not forget it 
The sky emits thunder 
And the clouds bring ram. 

On hearing the cuckoo’s call 
The abandoned one, too. 

Cries out for her lover 
Come to my house, Shyam, 

I remain ever attached to Thy feet 
Take Mira into Thy protection 
She offers herself as a sacrifice. 

Accept her as such 


Rays of Hope 
121 

Today I heard to my great delight 

That Han had come 

Seeing that He has in fact not come, 

I gaze down the road with yearning 
My eyes will not obey my commands 



[>eTotioiial Poems of ACra Bal 


85 


And emit a constant flow of tears 
What can I do? 

I am at a perfect loss 
I have not wings to fly 

Says Mira O my Master, the courtly Giridhara, 
I await Your coming m great expectation 

122 


The rainy season is abroad 
And the skirt of my dress is wet 
You have gone off to distant lands. 
And my heart finds it unbearable 
I keep sending letters to my Beloved 
Asking when He will return 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 
O Krishna, O Brother of Balram, 
Grant me Thy sight 


123 


I send letters to my Beloved, 

The dear Krishna 

But He sends no message of reply. 

Purposely preserving silence 

I sweep His path in readiness 

And gaze and gaze 

Till my eyes turn blood-shot 

I have no peace by night or day. 

My heart is fit to break 
O my Master, You were my companion 
In former births 
When will You come? 


124 

Come to my house, O beautiful Shyam 
Without You I have no joy. 

And have turned yellow as an autumn leaf 
I place faith in nothing else, 

O my Master, 



86 


Derofioiial Poems of Mira Bai 


Except m contemplation of ThTO 
May the Lord of Mira come quickly 
And spare her further shame 


125 

0 Govmd, for a loving friend. 

Thy ways are devious indeed i*® 

1 stand waitmg for Him at the door. 
And sweep the path 

And thus my mind gams peace 
Only Thou knowest my heart. 

And hence I breathe freely 
Mira’s Lord is Han, the Indestructible, 
Whom she loved in a former birth 
Come, my Beloved, 

In Thy absence I can no longer sleep 
I am gazing down Thy path 
Come, lovely Shyam, tbe Indestructible, 
I enjoy no comfort. 

And my heart is sorely distressed 
For Thy sake have I given up all 
Food and drink do not please me 
O Lord of Mira, Mira begs for darshan 
Hear her prayer 


127 


O Gopal, 

Now I have developed true love 
For Thy holy feet 
When my love began. 

No one knew of it. 

But now It IS an open secret 
Show compassion and grant me Thy sight. 
Think of Thy servant this instant 
Says Mira, O my Lord, 

0 courtly Gindhara, 

1 offer myself wholly at Thy lotus feet 



Devotional Poems of Mira Biu 


128 

My love has gone to those holy feet 
Without Thy sight, nothing pleases 
The world is a deceit and a delusion. 

Or simply a dream 

My fear of the ocean of transmigration. 

And all my worldly relationships. 

Have I cast at Han’s feet 

Mira says O my Lord, my courtly Giridhara, 
All my hopes he in taking refuge with Thee 

129 

0 Krishna, grant unto my love 
Its due reward 

You are for me an ocean of virtues. 

Regard not my defects 

The people of the world rate me. 

But my heart pays no attention 
Come and speak a sweet word to me 
With Thine own lips 

1 have been Thy servant for many bitths. 
Come to my courtyard, I beg Thee 

Says Mira O my Lord, the courtly Giridhara, 
Lead my raft to the further shore 

130 

Come to meet me, my Proud One, 

I have fallen in love 

With Thy beauteous form 

Enquire my name I am known 

As she whom “absence” drove to madness 

I enjoy peace neither by day nor night. 

Like a fish separated from water 
Without Thy sight I can enjoy nothing 
And am dying in writhing agony 
Mira is the servant of Thy feet 
Hear her pra>er, O Beneficent One ’ 



88 


DevotMMUil Poems of Mira Bai 


The Lord 
131 

Who but Thee will take notice of me, 

O Gindhara, Holder of the Mountain 
Thy crown of peacock-plumes 
And Thy yellow waist-band are most becoming 
Strange is the beauty of Thy large ear-rings 

0 Muran, Thou didst protect the modesty 
Of the daughter of Drupadi24 

In the midst of the packed assembly 

Says Mira, O my Master, the courtly Gindhara, 

1 offer myself as a sacrifice at Thy feet 

132 

0 Han ’ Hear my petition, my King 

1 am a weak girl, my Lord, 

Protect my reputation 
Wherever I go 1 am Thine 

Han has become the ornament of my heart 
Assuming the body of a horse, 

You slew the Daityas 

And fulfilled the purposes of the gods 

Mira has no other Lord but Thee, 

Thou art the crest-jewel on my head 

133 

I have taken refuge in Thee, O Krishna, 

Save me in any way Thou wilt 
I have returned fruitless 

From visiting the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage, 
But my mind will not accept defeat 

0 Muran, harken when I tell Thee 
That in this world 

1 have none to call my own 

Servant Mira places her faith in Krishna 
Release her from the snar? called “the world" 



DevotioBal Poems of BSi 


89 


134 

O Gindhara, I have taken refuge in Thee 
Protect me, O Ocean of Mercy ’ 

You saved the sinner Ajamil.^®® 

And the low-cast Sadana 

You saved the elephant when he was drowning,^*® 
You mounted the courtesan on a chariot 
You have saved many other low creatures, 

As the holy men relate O Gindhara, 

You saved the wild woman of the woods 
And also the hunch-back woman,^®® 

As all the world knows 
Thy virtues are past all telling, 

Even the Vedas and Puraijias are taxed 
Says Mira Lord, my refuge is m Thee, 

Harken to my prayer 


135 

My Lord, I am offering a petition 
Take my raft to the further shore 
I have suffered much in this world. 
Remove my doubts and afflictions 
The eight worldly pre-occupations^®® 
Have set in Oh, remove my pain 
The world is a flowing stream 
Comprising eighty-four lakhs of births 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 
May He end this coming and going 
Once and for all 


136 


0 Storehouse of Compassion, 

Lend Your ear to my prayer 

1 love the holy hymns proclaiming Your glory. 
But my life-breath ails 

I have no true relative or friend. 

The whole world has turned against me i®* 



90 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bm 


You saved the elephant bitten by a crocodile, 
Redeeming Your pledge 
Servant Mira makes humble petition 
That she has no other support but Thee 

137 

Han, I have heard that You save sinners. 
And rescue them from the miseries 
Of worldly existence 

You came running when You heard the cry 

Of the drowning elephant 

You remove the afflictions of Your devotees 

You lengthened the dress 

Of the daughter of Drupad, 

Humbling the pride of Duhshasan 
You kept Your promise to Prahlad, 

Teanng open the belly of Hirapyakashipu 
The wife of the rishi^®® received Y our grace 
You removed the sufferings 
Of the Brahmin Sudama 
Says Mira My Lord, 

You know my request 
Why delay any further‘d 


138 

Shy^, now You have taken my arm’ 
Drowning m the ocean of transmigration, 

I have taken refuge in You 
My defects are innumerable. 

Who but You could tolerate me‘> 

Says Mira O my Lord, Han the Indestructible, 
Do not allow Your reputations^® to falter 

139 

O Shyam, O Govind, do not depart 
From the orbit of my sight 
You sent the ox to the house of Kabir,s*o 
You mended N5m Dev’s roof,s^i 



DeTotional Poems of Mbri Bai 


You sowed Your servant Dhanna’s field, 

You heard the elephant’s cry 
You ate the forest-woman’s plums^** 

And Sudama’s handful of nee i*® 

You accepted Karama Bai’s dish,!*® 

And took it with joy 

Shyam shines forth amidst a thousand Gopis 

Like the moon amidst the stars 

You fulfilled the needs of all Your saints. 

But from Mira You remain aloof 

140 

0 my Beloved, I have felt the attraction 
Of the holy Name I have heard 

That those who take the Name are saved, 

The whole rock-hard world melts to water 

1 hive earned no merit 

And have amassed much demerit through sin 

The courtesan who taught her parrot 

To repeat the holy Name 

Was transported to the heaven of Vishnu 

The elephant only half-pronounced Your Name, 

Yet all his troubles came to an end 
Descending from Garuda, You came running on foot. 
And all his re-birth in animal wombs 
Came to an end 

You exempted Ajamil!*® from his sms 
And his fear of death melted away 
He sang the holy Name 
Simply by calling for his son. 

This the whole world knows 
You recognize faith when you see it. 

And grant boons to those who seek refuge 
With a pure heart 
Mira is Your servant. 

Accept her as Your own* 



92 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Faith 

141 


Now my faith is strong. 

Weak woman though I be 

The beautiful Shyam has come to my house 

I already have Han for my necklace, 

I will have Him for my ear-rings too. 

Him, my bnde-groom, Vitthal Nath 
My crest-jewel is the Four-Armed Vishnu, 
Whose image revolves in my mind — 

I need not go to a goldsmith 
My anklets are composed 
Of Him who IS the Life of the Universe 
Krishna is my arm-band. 

And my foot-band too 
My foot-rings and dancer’s anklets 
Are Rama Narayana,“* 

The nng on my big toe, the Inner Ruler 
I will have a casket aflSxed to my belt, 

Made from the Supreme Spirit,^^ 

A lock from the Name of Tnvikram,i®* 

A key from Him whose Joy is compassion 

There will I keep my treasures safe 

Now I am seated in the bnde-groom’s house. 

Arrayed in finery and quite without shame 

Says Mira O my Master, the courtly Giridhara, 

Henceforth I will address my petitions 

To the feet of Hari 


142 

Shr! Krishna has entered my heart 

And the clouds have filled the sky 

Thunder roars, clouds quake 

And the flashes of lightning inspire terror 

Cloud-banks mount as the east wind blows 

Frogs croak, the cuckoo sings. 

And the cry of the jieacock is heard 



Devotioiial Poems of IVDril BSi 


93 


Says Mira O my Master, the courtly Gindfaara, 
My mind has gone to Thy lotus feet 


Expectation 

143 

I have heard that today Han will come 

0 my companion, 

1 will climb my high palace 

To see when my King will come 
Frogs, peacocks and papihas are calling. 

The koil IS striking its plaintive note 
Indrai®^ is exulting, rain is falling everywhere. 
The lightning is dancing without shame 
The earth robes herself anew 
To greet Indra 

Says Mira, O my Master, the courtly Gindhara* 
Come quickly, my King 


Meeting the Beloved 
144 


I offer a thousand thanks 

To the astrologer who predicted Shyam would come 
My joy IS overflowing, my soul has access 
To an incalculable storehouse of joy 
I meet with my companions^®* 

To honour and please the Beloved, 

And there is joy all round 
O My dear compamon. 

Now that I have seen the Lord, 

All my desires are fulfilled 

And my suffermgs forgotten 

Shyam, the Ocean of Joy, Mira’s Lord, 

Has entered her home 



94 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


145 

O Shyam, today I have observed 
The colourful ceremony of Gauri Puja 
Lightning flashes in black and coppery clouds 
As the storm collects 

Frogs, peacocks and cuckoos are in full voice, 

The koil IS singing loudly 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 

She stakes all on His holy feet 

146 

Here are the clouds of the rainy season. 

The rainy season so dear to the heart 
My heart overflows with delight 
This rainy season, 

As I have heard that Han will come 
Thick and threatening clouds have collected. 

The lightning brings with it steady ram 

Now the lightning is accompanied by light drops 

And a delightful cool breeze 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 

This IS the time for auspicious hymns 

147 

Come to my house, my Shyam, 

For the rainy season fills me with emotion 
The clouds have collected from all quarters 
And the thunder is roaring 
Frogs, peacocks and cuckoos cry out. 

And the koil sings lustily 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 

What she can offer is small 


148 

Myself dyed deep with love and emotion, 
I am playing Holi^-®® with Shyam 
The red powder is flying. 



Devotioosl Poems of IVGrI Bai 


95 


The very clouds are red in the sky 

I am pumping out jets of coloured water 

With the help of a squirt 

My pot IS full of saffron 

And various fragrant unguents 

Mira is the servant of the courtly Giridhara, 

She IS lying, handmaid, at His feet 

149 

Come cloud, fill Thyself with water and come 

0 my companion. 

The raindrops are falling. 

Just listen to the koil’s cry 
A sweet breeze is playing 
To the music of thunder. 

And the sky is overcast with clouds 
Today the Beloved will come to my house 

1 have prepared a bed for Him, 

And you, O my companions. 

Will sing Him songs of welcome 

Says Mira O Han, O Indestructible One, 
Fortunate indeed are those who attain Thy side 

150 

The Beloved has come to my house 
After many an age of expectation. 

The abandoned one has found her Lover 
I am offering Him jewels as a present 
And performing the Arti in His honour 
The Beloved is compassionate 
And sent me a message 
My darkling Beloved has come. 

Every limb m my body throbs with joy 
My love is for that ocean of love, Han 
His love has entrapped my eyes 
Says Mira He is joy abundant, 

I have enthroned Him on my brow 



96 


DevotionI Poems of Mira Bal 


151 

Come to my pavilion, O my King 
I have spread a bed 

Made of delicately selected buds and blossoms. 
And have arrayed myself in bridal garb 
From head to toe 

I have been Thy slave during many births. 
Thou art the be-all of my existence.^®* 

Mira’s Lord is Han, the IndeStructible 
Come, grant me Thy sight at once 

152 

I am deeply attached to Thy beauty, 

O Lover of Radha, O Great King 
Robed m saffron. 

He wears a jewel-studded crown 

With a peacock plume 

With His alligator-earrings 

And peacock -plume crown 

He IS the very picture of refinement 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 

She says Today I have met my King 


Self-Dedication 

153 

Go to the place where the Beloved abides, 
Go to the place where you may find Him 
If the Beloved tells me, 

I will put on a red san, 

If he tells me, 

I will don the ochre robe 
I will decorate my hair-parting with pearls 
Or leave my scattered locks unkempt. 

Either according to His wish 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 

She says Harken to the praises of my King. 



Devotional Poems of IVCra Bsu 


154 

0 Gmdhara Lai, keep me as Thy servant 
Keep me as Thy servant 

1 will remain Thy faithful servant. 

Will plant Thy garden. 

And every morning will rise early 
To have Thy sight 
In the leafy lanes of Bnndavan 
I will sing the deeds of Govind 
If I perform Thy service, 

I will have Thy sight for reward 
Thy remembrance will be my wages. 

The spirit of devotion my fief. 

For which I have longed during many a birth 
Beautiful is Krishna with His peacock crown. 
His Yellow waist-cloth 
And His glittering necklace of gems 
Mohan, the flute-player. 

Is grazing the cows in Bnndavan 
I will make fresh green bowers for Him, 
With borders between 
Robed m a scarlet sari, 

I shall enjoy the sight of Shyam, 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gmdhara, 

Her heart is in much perturbation 
I request to have sight of the Lord 
At midnight by the banks of the Yamuni 

155 

O my companion, 

Shyam shot an arrow 

That has pierced me through 

The fire of longing 

Is burning m my heart 

And my whole body is in torment 

My roving mind cannot stir. 

Fettered in the chains of love 
No one but myself and my Beloved 



98 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Knows the extent of my pain 
I can do nothing, my companion. 

But weep copious tears 

Mira says, “My Lord, unless you come 

My life cannot endure ” 


The World 
156 


O my companion. 

Without Shyam I suffer greatly Without Him, 
Who can give me strength to endure 
The world is a hissing cauldron of error 
It takes no joy 

In cultivating the society of the good 

They abuse the holy men 

While themselves earning demerit 

By their wicked deeds 

Without the Name of God 

One does not gam liberation. 

One merely circulates 

In the eighty-four lakhs of wombs 

The fools waste their precious lives. 

Not seeking the society of the good 
Even in a dream 

Mira says My Lord, I take refuge m Thee 

Thus will I attain 

The highest state open to man 

157 


The jjeople of the world 

Would die of shame 

To be caught taking the Name of God 

They will tramp round the whole village. 

But feel too fatigued 

To visit the temple of Han 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


99 


If a quarrel arises 
They run to it at once. 

Leaving what they are doing in the house 
To hear a buffoon crack jests. 

Or to watch a courtesan dance. 

They will sit twelve hours at a stretch 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara 
She has taken refuge at His lotus feet 

158 

You cannot call this true devotion. 

To bathe one’s forehead and apply the tilak 
Without cleansing the impurities of the heart 
That cruel cur desire 
Has bound me with the cord of greed 
The butcher of anger remains within me. 

How can I hope to meet GopaP 
The greedy senses are like a cat. 

And I keep on giving them food 
Weakened by my hunger for sense-objects 
I do not take the Name of God 
I worship not God but myself. 

And glow with ecstasy 
Now that I have built up 
This towering rock of pride. 

Where can the water of true wisdom collect*^!^*® 

You cannot deceive Him who knows 

The inmost recesses of your soul 

The Name of Han does not enter my heart. 

Though I tell with my lips 

The beads of my bejewelled rosary 

Learn to love the compassionate Lord, 

Give up faith in the world 

Mira is the slave of the courtly Gindhara, 

She has adopted the path of simple detachment 

159 

How can one come to meet the Lord'> 

For fifteen hours one is busy. 



100 


Den>ti<Mul Poeois Mini Bn 


And the xemaming nine one sleei». 
Having received the psioeless gift 
Of a bnman birtli. 

We remain adeep and it is wasted. 
Misak's Lord is the courtly Gindhara. 
She says: What is to be must be. 
Worship the Lord. 


TheLani of Bny 
160 

O my companion, the sight of Bnndavan 
Has become very d^ar to me 
ha every house the Lord is worshipped 
By the ofieiing of tnlsi-Ieaves, 

And they onjoy the sight of the Lord 
With reverence. 

The pore water of the Yamuna floMns, 

And their sole nouxidimeat is milk and curds 
The Lord sits <m a gem-studded throne. 
Wearing a crown rd* tulsi-leavcs 
O Shyam, I walked*** from bower to bower, 
Listeiung to the sounds of Thy flute. 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 

She says, **Without worship of the Lord, 
Man is a lecdile creature ” 


161 


O my mind. 

Let ns go to the bank of the Yamuna 
My whole body has been refreshed 
By the pnre waters of the Yamuna 
Krishna was playing PQs flute 
In the company of Balw *** 

His peacock’s feather crown 

And yellow loindkith are charming 

The diaxEKMids m His ear-rmgs sparkle. 



DeTfrtioiial Poons Mira Bai 


101 


!Kfira’s Lord is the coniily GSkidiiaxa — 
Behold, He is playing with BalvSr. 


The OiifidiS^MKts 

1«2 

0 Krishna, who braided Thy^-black lods? 
Was it Yashoda who prq^aied Thy 

With sndh a dezterons hand 
And such bewitching ait? 

If You once come into my little house 

1 will riiut its sandalwood doors 
And pull the bolt. 

Miira*s Lord is the courtly Giridhara. 

She offos hersdUT in saraifioe 
To those beautiful lods. 


1«3 

Welcome, O I>we]]er m Gokul! 

The women of Cioknl are ravished 
At Thy sight. 

Some smg, some dance, some laugh. 

The Lord has donned a yellow loindoth 
And is fragrant with the scent of aloes. 
To such a handsome hfostier as Oindhara, 
One like Mira wilt be a riave. 


1<>4 

O my companion, my Krishna, 

Has veritably become a fragment of my heart. 
Lovely are His peacock-plim^ crown. 

His yellow lomcloth and npphng car-^mgs. 
The Son of Nand is bu^ daniang 
In the bowers and lanes of Bnndaban. 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Oindhara: 

She has taken refuge at the lotus iedt 
Of that Stealer of the Heart. 



102 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


165 

Wake up, my dear flute player. 

Wake up, my darling 
The mght has passed. 

Dawn has come. 

People are opening their doors 
You can hear the gopis churning the curds. 
Harken to the clink of their bracelets 
Wake up, Lalji, the dawn has come. 

Men and gods alike 
Are waiting at Thy door to greet Thee 
The cowherd boys are m a frenzy. 
Everywhere there are shouts of “Jai* Jai’” 
Now the little herdsmen 

Have taken their parcels of bread and butter 
Ready to go out 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara 
He saves those 

Who choose Him for their refuge 


The Playing of The Flute 
166 


On the banks of the Yamuna 
The flute was heard 

The Flute-Player has captured my heart. 
My soul has not strength to withstand 
Dark Himself, 

Krishna is seated on a dark blanket 
By the dark waters of the Yamuna 
On hearing the sounds of the flute 
I lose body-consciousness. 

My body remaining like a stone 
Says Mira, O my Lord, 

The courtly Giridhara, 

Come quickly and end my pain 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


103 


167 


Sister, the sound of the flute 
Has driven me crazy 
Without Han, nothing avails 
On hearing the sounds 
I loose body-consciousness. 

My heart well caught 
In the meshes of the net 

What vows and observances have you performed, 
O flute‘s Who is now at your side'^ 

The magic of those seven notes 

Has entrapped even Mira’s Lord Himself 


The Serpent 
168 

O Thou of the lotus-leaf eyes. 

Thou didst tame the black serpent 
Thou didst subdue the serpent 
In a pool of the Yamuna, 

Dancing on his ruflled black crests 
Thou didst leap into the water without fear 
For Thou art one. 

But Thy powers are infinite 
Mira’s Lord, the courtly Gindhara, 

Is the darling of the women of Braj 


Stealmg The Clothes 
169 

Sister, today that little monkey 
Stole my sari and sat with it 
On the branch of a Kadamba tree 
Sister, today that little monkey Gindhara 
Met me on the road 



104 


Devotional Poems of Mira 


I had gone to the Yamuna 
To fetch water. 

When along came Krishna Muran 
The little monkey stole my sari. 

And I was left standing naked 
In the water 

‘ My companions all laughed 

And clapped their hands to see my plight 
My mother-in law is ill-natured. 

My sister-in-law morose. 

They quarrel with me and abuse me 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara 
She offers herself in sacrifice 
To His lotus feet 


170 


Murari gave my sari a twitch 

The pot of dye I was carrying 

Fell from my head 

My nose-ring slipped oft 

And got caught in my sari 

My hair broke loose 

And became entangled in my ear-rings. 

The tip of my sari was tom 
The Charmer of Hearts was in wanton mood. 
That delicate exponent of the art of love 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara, 

She places her head at His lotus feet 


The Tryst 
171 

Giridhara is coming down my lane. 

And I have hidden myself for shame 
A brilliant red turban, 

A yellow dress. 

And a chaplet of flowers covering it 



Deyotional Poems of IVDra Bai 


105 


A parasol arches over His crown. 

And the beauty of His ear-nngs 
Passes descnption 
1X74 will wear a yellow satin skirt 
With a rich bodice above 
Seeing Krishna Muran coming. 

His dear Radha has hidden 

She wears a lovely peacock-plume crown. 

Her nose-nng is charming. 

And a glittering necklace of pearls 
Hangs from her neck 
I offer myself in sacrifice 
To her lotus feet 

Darling Radha stands in supphcation. 
Saying, “O Krishna Muran, 

Hear my prayer ” 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 

She offers herself in sacnfice 
To His lotus feet 


The Steps to Hie River 
172 


O my companion. 

My Mohan has stolen my heart 
What shall I do*? 

Where shall I go*^ 

My life-breaths are wedded to the Lord 
In total dedication 

0 my companion, 

1 was going to fetch water 

With my water-pot balanced on my head 
Suddenly a dark form. 

Not yet grov/n to full manhood. 
Appeared before me 
And bound me in His spell 
I caste off worldly shame 



106 


Devotional Poems of Mira BaE 


And thus my cause prospered 
Mira is the slave of Lai Giridhara 
She chose her bridegroom carefully 

173 

The dagger of love has pierced my heart 
I was going to the nver to fetch water, 
A golden pitcher^^s on my head 
Hariji has bound me 
By the thm thread of love. 

And wherever He draws me. 

Thither I go 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara 

This IS the nature 

Of His dark and beautiful form 

174 


0 my companion. 

The sight of Shyam is hke a dagger 

1 have lost body-consciousness^’® 

And am reduced to a ruinous state 
My body is pervaded by pain. 

My heart in a state of intoxication 
Three or four companions are with me. 
All m a state of madness 

I know Him well. 

He IS the “Stroller in the Woods” 

The partridge longs only for the moon. 
The lamp burns the moth. 

The fish dies without water 
This IS the love that is precious 
If I do not see Him 
How can I hve*^ 

My heart finds peace nowhere 
Go to Krishna 

And tell Him that Mira is His 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


107 


Holi 

175 


Gindhara is playing Holi 

He plays to perfection 

The flute, the lute and the drums. 

Along with his companions, the women of Braj 

Mohan Bihari scatters with His own hand 

The sandalwood and saffron 

In large handfuls He flings the red powder 

In all directions 

And it falls on everyone 

There is the handsome youth Krishna, 

And with Him is Radha, 

Dear to Him as His life 
He sings the apprporiate songs for Holi, 
Clapping exquisitely in time with the music 
That great artist Shyam is playing Holi, 

And all Braj is flooded with joy 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 

Is Mohan Lai, “The Stroller in the Woods” 


Sellmg The Curds 
176 

Where are You taking me, Krishna*? 

In the lanes and bowers of Bnndaban, 
He has taken me by the hand 
He ate my curds and broke the pot 
And took me in His arms 
He jumped at me. 

And dashed my pot to the ground. 

That dark figure with the beautiful limbs 
O Mohan, 

You came and went freely in Gokul, 

But would never accept my curds 



108 


DeTotional Foams of IVfini Bai 


Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gitidhara, 
Her Master from birth to birth 

177 


O my compamon. 

What 1 saw m Brsy today was magic 
A Gopi 1” was canymg a pot 
When she found herself confronted 
By the Son of Nand. 

O my compamon. 

She forgot the word for curds outright 
And just said 

■“Will someone take the beautiful Shyam?** 

In the leafy lane of Brmdavan, 

The Charmer of Hearts 

Fixed His glance on the maiden and left. 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 

The beautiful, handsome, savorous Shyam 

178 

She is wandermg about, pot on head. 

Slaying “Who •will take the beautiful Shyam?” 
The Gopi has forgotten the word for curds. 
And IS saying “Take Han, take Han ” 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 

She has accepted slavery without payment 
The Gopi is dazzled by Knshna’s beauty. 

And IS babbhng aimlessly 


The Departure For Mathura 
179 

O Han, where have You gone 

After coming and sowing the seeds of love‘s 

You sowed the seeds of love. 

And stole my heart. 



Devoliolud Poems of IVluS Bm 


109 


And drew forth a piteous cry 
I beheve I will take poison and die 
Yon set the boat of love m motion 
And abandoned it m midstream 
You betn^ed me and left me 
O Lord of Mira, 

You are dallying m Mathura, 
When will You comc^ 


180 

Shyam has disappeared from view 
Like the fragile moon 
Having gone to Mathura 
He has become a citizen of that city. 

But us He has caught 

In the noose of love 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 

It seems that now His love is waning 

181 

Shyam has stalked off to pumsh me 
And IS frolickmg about with other women 
He will not even speak to me 
He will not even come into my lane. 

But steps into the courtyards of others 
He will not even touch my finger. 

But twists the arms of others 
He will not touch my shawl. 

But He lifts the veil of others 
Shyam is Mira’s Lord, 

But He wanders about hke a rake 


O my companion. 

My modesty was my enemy 
Why did I not go off 
With Shri Lai GopaP 


182 



110 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


The cruel Akrur^'^® came in a decorated chariot 
He seated Gopal on the chariot 
And drove off. 

Leaving me wringing my hands 
My heart must be of steel 
Not to break Shyam left me. 

And now my whole body 
Is burning with the pam of longing 
Mira is the slave of Lai Giridhara, 

Why IS she not already dead and scattered*^ 


Conversation With TJddhava 
183 

O Uddhava,!®® it is all the fault 

Of our own Karma 

It is useless to blame others 

0 Harken, my companions. 

It was while walking on the path 
That I suffered the blow 
At first I did not understand,!®^ 

1 had chosen the road of!*® egoism 

I did not think Han would leave me. 

But our good and evil fortune 
Is written by the finger of fate 
Mira’s Lord is Hari, toe Indestructible 
Come, Lord, remove her pam 

184 

The impulse comes into my mind 

To rove about in company with Gopal 

When I beheld the beauty 

Of His lotus face 

I lost control of my faculties 

Let me take flute and staff in hand 

And don a yellow loin-cloth 

Let me rove about with the herds. 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


111 


Clad like a herdsman 

And wearing a peacock-plume crown 

See, I have become a lovely creeper 

Gracing the Bnndaban nights 

I see the beasts and birds and monkeys 

And hear the discourses of the sages 

The elders have laid down 

A narrow code of conventional behaviour 

To whom can I open my heart‘d 

O Mira, find the Lord Gindhara 

And continue your life like this 

185 

O Uddhav, who will read this letter 
In the absence of the Lord, 

Who will read it*^!®* 

You came with this piece of paper. 

But where did you leave your Comrade‘s 

Our feet are worn with walking 

And our eyes have turned bloodshot 

Radha took the letter 

And sat reading it 

Her heart overflowed 

Water streamed from her lotus eyes 

Like the mighty flow of the Ganges 

She turned yellow like an autumn leaf. 

And would not touch food 

In the absence of Han, 

Her heart was burning 
Like the wick of a lamp 
My faith is m Krishna^®® 

Who saved the drowning elephant 
Mira is the slave of Lai Gindhara, 

Her companion on a narrow path 



112 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


The WOd Woman of the Woods 
1S6 

The wild woman of the woods^®® 

Found out the sweet plums by tasting them 

And brought them to the Lord 

She was neither cmlized nor educated 

Nor possessed of physical beauty 

She was of low caste and filthy apparel. 

But the Lord accepted her soiled plums. 
Knowing the smcenty of her love 
She recognized no distmctions of high and low. 
But sou^t only the pure milk of love 
Not for her the leanung of the Veda, 

She was transported to heaven on a chariot 

At a single stroke 

Now she sports in Vaikunth,i»’ 

Bound to Han by ties of love 

Says servant Mira 

Whoso loves like this is saved 

The Lord is the Saviour of the Fallen 

And I was a cowherd-maiden at Gokul 

In a former birth 


Sndama 

187 

The Lord smiled to see Sudama,i®» 

The Lord smiled 

His shoes worn to shreds. 

He came unshod. 

His feet blistering on the wa> 

“You were my childhood incnd Sudama 
Why do you now live <^0 tar"^ 

Has Bhabhp9o sent Me » pre!>ent‘>” 

Yes, the present consisted 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


113 


Of a handful and a half of rice 
On arriving back home, 

Sudama exclaimed in surprise 
“My Lord, 

Where has my broken-down cottage gone‘> 
What is this palace. 

Studded with diamonds, rubies and pearls'^ 
Where are my cow and calf‘> 

What mean these elephants 
Chained by the doorway*? 

Mira’s Lord is Han, the Indestructible 
She says I have taken sanctuary with Thee 


Reaping The Fruits of one’s Deeds 
188 

0 Jogi, I did not plumb Thy depths 
1191 took up my asan 

And sat in a cave 

1 engaged in contemplation of Han, 

Beads round my neck, 

Clothi99 jjj hand, body covered in ashes 
Mira’s Lord is Han, the Indestructible 
What was written in her fate i**® 

That she received 


189 

Nothing can halt the course of Karma 
King Harishchandra the Truthfu'i®* 
Carried water in the house of the sweeper 
The bones of Draupadi, 

Queen of the Five Pandus 
Rotted on the Himalayan slopes i’® 

Ball performed a sacrifice 

Aimed at taking him to Indra’s throne. 

But ended up in the nether regions i95a 



114 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 
He changed the poison to nectar 

190 

Strange are the decrees of fate 
Behold the large eyes of the deer’ 

Yet he is forced to roam the forests 
The harsh crane has brilliant plumage. 
While the sweet-voiced cuckoo is black 
The rivers flow in pure streams. 

But the sea makes them salt 
Fools sit on thrones as kings. 

While the wise beg their bread 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 
The King persecutes the Bhaktas 

191 

Do not mention the name of love, 

O my simple-minded companion 

Strange is the path 

When you offer your love 

Your body is crushed at the first step 

If you want to offer love 

Be prepared to cut off your head 

And sit on it 

Be like the moth. 

Which circles the lamp and offers its body 
Be like the deer which on hearing the horn 
Offers Its head to the hunter 
Be like the partridge. 

Which swallows burning coals 
In love of the moon 
Be like the fish. 

Which yields up its life 
When separated from the sea 
Be like the bee. 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


115 


Entrapped m the closing petals of the lotus 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara 
She says Offer your mind 
To those lotus feet 


192 

Only he knows the bitterness of love 
Who has deeply felt its pangs 
When you are in trouble 
No one comes near you 
When fortune smiles. 

All come to share the joy 
Love shows no external wound. 

But the pain pervades every pore 
Devotee Mira offers her body 
As a sacrifice to Gindhara for ever 

193 

Go to that impenetrable realm 

That Death himself trembles to look upon 

There plays the fountain of love 

With swans sporting on its waters 

There the company of holy men is available. 

And one may talk of spiritual knowledge i*® 

There one can meditate on Shyam 

And purify one’s mind 

There one may bind on 

The anklets of good-conduct. 

And dance the dance of inner contentment 
There one may adopt a headpiece of gold 
And the sixteen kinds of adornment 
Let there be love for Shyam 
And indifference to all else 



116 


Devotional Poems of IVlira Bai 


Spiritual Teaching 
194 


That dark Dweller in Braj 
Is my only refuge 

0 my companion, 

Worldly comfort is an illusion, 

As soon you get it, it goes 

1 have chosen the Indestructible tor my refuge. 
Him W'hom the snake of death 

Will not devour 

My Beloved dwells in my heart, 

I have actually seen that Abode of Joy 
Mira’s Lord is Han, the Indestructible 
My Lord, I have taken refuge with Thee, 

Thy slave 


195 


O my mind. 

Worship the lotus feet of the Indestructible One’ 
Whatever thou seest twixt earth and sky 
Will perish 

Why undertake fasts and pilgrimages'^ 

Why engage m philosophical discussions'^ 

Why commit suicide in Banaras*^ 

Take no pride in the body. 

It will soon be mingling with the dust 
This life IS like the sporting of sparrows 
It will end with the onset of night 
Why don the ochre robe 
A.nd leave home as a sannyasi'^ 

Those who adopt the external garb of a Jogi 
But do not penetrate to the secret 
Are caught again in the net of rebiith 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara 
Deign to sever, O Master 
All the knots in her heart 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


117 


196 


We do not get a human life 
Just for the asking 
Birth in a human body 
Is the reward for good deeds 
In former births 

Life waxes and wanes imperceptibly. 

It does not stay long 
The leaf that has once fallen 
Does not return to the branch 
Behold the Ocean of Transmigration, 

With Its swift, irresistible tide 
O Lai Giridhara, O pilot of my soul. 

Swiftly conduct my barque to the further shore 

Mira is the slave of Lai Giridhara 

She says Life lasts but a few days only 

197 


Life in the world is short. 

Why shoulder an unnecessary load 
Of worldly relationships'^ 

Thy parents gave thee birth in the world. 
But the Lord ordained thy fate 
Life passes in getting and spending. 

No merit is earned by virtuous deeds 
I will sing the praises of Han 
In the company of holy men. 

Nothing else concerns me 
Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara, 
She says Only by Thy power 
Have I crossed to the further shore 

198 

Do not forget thy duty to serve, 

O servant 

Thy joys are of short duration, 



118 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


Like the blossom on the pomegranate 
You came here for the sake of profit. 

But forgot your capital 

And threw it away 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Giridhara 

She says 

In this world you must practise detachment 

199 


O my mind. 

Drink the nectar of the Name of God ^oo 
Drink the nectar of the Name of God 
Give up evil company. 

And continually keep the company 
Of holy men 

Listen to the accounts of Han 

That proceed from their lips 

Expel lust, anger, pride, greed and infatuation 

From thy mind 

Mira’s Lord is the courtly Gindhara, 

She IS soaked in His love 


200 


0 my mind, 

1 repeat continually the Name of Shyam 

0 ye living creatures. 

Through repeating the Name of Shyam 

1 have absolved a million sms 
The Name of Shyam has destroyed 
Ancient sms of many a former birth 
It IS a draft of nectar 

In a golden cup. 

Who could refuse to drink it*^ 

Mira’s Lord is Han, the Indestructible 
She IS dissolved in Shyam, 

Body and mind 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bal 


201 

My love for Shyam has set m. 

And my eyes have known 
The joy of His sight 

0 my companion, 

1 arrayed myself in full adornment. 

And the Beloved came running to meet me 
I have chosen no miserable bridegroom 
Who will die at each rebirth 

0 my companion, 

1 have chosen Shyam for my bridegroom. 
Who will be my crest-jewel immortal 
Krishna has requited my love. 

That has lasted from birth to birth 
Mira says, O Han’ O Indestructible One’ 
When will you come to my side‘s 

202 

Ranachor*®® has stolen my heart 

His peacock-plume crown 

Waves over His head like a royal parasol. 

The beauty of His ear-rings 

Outreaches description 

The sea is washing His feet. 

While the Gomati River flows on nearby 
Flags on poles adorn its banks. 

Festooned with swaying strings of pearls 2®* 
Our Lord and Master Ranachor 
Ever provides for the welfare of His devotees 
Mira says O my Master, 

O courtly Gindhara, O Nand Kishor, 204 
Deign to grasp me by the hand 




NOTES 


1 

Pam arising from the inevitable diseases of the body, pain due to the work 
of malignant divine or demoniac forces, and pain arising from the interpla> 
of the elements, for example the pain arising from drought or flood 
2 

Prahlada was the son of Hirapyakasipu, king of the demons Persecuted 
by his father, Prahlada remained constant m devotion to Visnu One day his 
father asked him, “Where is your God Prahlada replied, “He is every- 
where, even in this pillar ” Hirapyakasipu kicked the pillar with his foot, 
whereupon the Lord sprang out from it in the form of a “Man-Lion” and 
destroyed him Eventually the Lord elevated Prahlada to the rank of Indra, 
whose place as king of the gods had been usurped by the demon 
Hiranyakasipu 

3 

Dhruva performed austerities at the command of his mother while yet a 
child, and was eventually granted the following boon “Thou shalt attain 
to flxity above all the worlds, planets and constellations, and shalt exist as 
their support Thy place of abode will be called Dhruva-loka ” This world 
manifests to us as the pole-star 

4 

The demon Bali threatened to conquer and tyrannize over the universe, 
but the Lord appeared in the form of a dwarf (Vaman) and asked to be given 
as much land as He could bestnde in three paces Granted the boon. He 
caused His body to swell in size till all heaven and earth were covered in two 
strides The third stride confined Bah s powers to the infernal regions 

5 

Ahalya or Ahilya, wife of the seer Gautama, was turned to stone by her 
husband’s curse But she was brought back to life by the touch of the foot 
of the Lord Vispu in His incarnation as Rama 

6 

Kaliya was a five-headed serpent dwelling in a pool in the Jumna near 
Brndavana, from which he would sally forth and cause great destruction 
The child Kisna placed His foot on the middle head of the serpent and forced 
him to leave Bmdavana for the sea 
7 

When Krsna diverted the cowherds of Bmdavana from worship of Indra, 
the god threatened to deluge them with rain But Kr^na tore up the Govar- 
dhana hill near the village and held it aloft on His little finger to serve as an 
umbrella 



122 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


8 

The name ‘ GirvJhara’* by which Mirabai constantly addresses Kisna 
means **He who held aloft the Mountain” and refers to the incident recorded 
m the previous note Lala is an affectionate term for a child The Sanskrit 
form Giridhara has been preserved in the translation, though it appears that 
Mira regularly used the form Giradhara 

9 

As long as the soul remains bereft of the grace of God, it continues to act 
with egoism and attachment, and such action forces it to return to earth m a 
new body to experience the ‘Truits” or moral deserts of that action Thus the 
soul becomes involved in continual rebirth m new bodies, exposed to the 
certainty of suffering, disease and death As this process is self-perpetuating 
and inevitable until the soul is rescued by the grace of the Lord, it is called an 
'unnavigable sea” and He the 'raft 

10 

A name for Kisija which means “He who enjoys the pleasures ot gay 
company” and also “A stroller, a wanderer” 

11 

A small round mark of sandal-paste or other colouring matter placed 
between the eye-brows as an ornament or as an auspicious mark on ceremonial 
occasions 

12 

The name of the district round Agra and Mathuri where exploits 

as a child took place 

13 

A name of Krsna meaning ‘ The Charming One” 

14 

was the son of Vasudeva, and was born in MathurS But he was 
hidden away in the neighbouring villages on the Jumna by his parents to 
thwart the murderous intentions of His wicked maternal uncle. King Karpsa 
of Mathura First He went to Gokula, and at the age of seven moved on 
to Brndavana He was brought up there by his foster-mother Ya§oda in the 
family of Nanda, the local tribal chief 

15 

1 e the Vijayanti Mala of Vi?nu, a necklace composed of five kinds of 
gems, viz pearl, ruby, emerald, sapphire and diamond 

16 

Literally “The Cowherd”, and therefore referring to Kr?na in particular 
during His boyhood in Brndavana It is taught that Visnu, the Lord God 
made “descents ’ to earth (“Incarnations ’ or Avataras), of which those as 
R^a and Kr^a are the most important 

17 

An affectionate name for the Lord God Visnu, explained by the Bhaktas 
as meaning “He who steals away the sins of His devotees ” 

18 

From Vedic times, the Hindus have believed in three planes of existence. 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


123 


manifested as (1) the earth together with the nether regions, (2) jthe space 
between the earth and the ‘ roof’’ of the sky, and (3) an abode of perpetual 
light hidden beyond the roof of the sky The deity presiding over these three 
worlds IS invoked m the syllables ‘*bhQr bhuvahsvah” pronounced before the 
recitation of the sacred Gayatn verse 

19 

No worldly object is worthy of complete love, because all are transient 
But the Lord from whom objects proceed and into whom they ultimately 
dissolve IS a worthy object of our supreme love because He is eternal and 
indestructible 

20 

“'Dweller in Braj”, a name of Krsna 

21 

The ‘Nagara” of ‘‘Gindhara Nagara” means “a townsman” and hence 
“polished”, ‘sophisticated” and ‘skilled in the aits of love” Students of the 
Snmad Bhagavata will remember how sensitive the village girls of Braj were 
about Kisna’s association with the fine ladies of the court and town of 
Mathura Negara” has been translated as “courtly” throughout 
22 

The Dark One , a name given to Kfsna in allusion to the dark colour 
of His body, the colour of a rain-cloud 

23 

A design having magical properties 

24 

A verbal spell 

25 

Probably the ‘ house” means “the body” and the meaning is “How can 
I continue to live One of the alternative versions quoted by D S Bh^fl 
has body’ instead of ‘house” 

26 

1 e the three-bended” pose, standing with legs crossed, body slightly 
bent from the waist and arms raised and curved to play the flute 

27 

‘The Intoxicator’ 

28 

The old Sanskrit name “Yamuna” has been preserved to refer to the rivei 
Jumna, which flows down from Delhi past Bmdavana and Mathura Bui 
Mira herself uses the modern form 

29 

Enemy of the demon Mura’ , a name of Kr§ija 

30 

The words m the original are “Rama ji ’ Opinions differ about Mira’s 
use of the name Rama I follow Sa^i Prabha in thinking that she used it basi- 
cally as a name for Krsna, as virtually all the imagery used in the present 
edition of the Padavali concerns Krspa When reference is made to acts of 
compassion traditionally attributed to Visnu in His various forms and 



124 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


incarnations, they axe attributed by Mira personally to l§yama. Poem 139 
Except at Poem 186, no scenes from the life of Rama son of Daiaratha are 
depicted Admittedly the word “Rama” was used by the Sant poets, to whom 
Mira owes some degree of allegiance, quite generally in the sense of “God” 
But a particularly clear instance of the use of “Rtoia” to mean “Krspa” is 
recorded at Note 58, Poem 55 

31 

See Note 16 

32 

There are other versions of this famous poem m which the reference to 
miraculous delivery from the effects of poison does not occur, and one cannot 
but suspect that the line is an interpolation If it is taken as genuine, it would 
have to be presumed that the whole poem was composed after Mira had 
left Mewar, and that the reference was to an attempt made on her life by 
Vikramajita Siipha, her borther-in-law See the account of her life in the 
Introduction and Note 41 below 

33 

The reference to a miraculous escape from a black serpent concealea 
in a basket is less well attested m the early hagiographical literature than the 
attempted poisomng (Padmavati, p 85) One must assume that if the poem 
IS accepted as authentic, the line must be an interpolation 
33a 

The mystics join hands down the ages and all across continents Acarya 
Caturvedi very appositely compares this poem with the “Man az *alam tu 
ra tanha guzmam” of Jal^ uddin ROmi, which is translated in R A 
Nicholson, “Divani Shamsi Tabriz”, Cambridge 1898 (reprinted 1952) p 121 

34 

This IS thought to be a reminiscence by Mira of her previous life associated 
with !§ri Kr§ija as the Gopi Lalita 

35 

Reading karaipn 

36 

Reading gail The commentators differ over the reading and the meaning 

37 

Cp Note 34 

38 

The body, composed of the five elements enumerated in classical 
Hindu physics — ether, wind, fire, water, earth 

39 

Perhaps the world, perhaps Mira’s royal home The commentators differ 
over this obscure line 

40 

Krsna From gopa4-tndra== Great Cowherd 

41 

Many authorities have expressed doubts about the authenticity of the 
poems 30-42 and others which refer either to persecution by a king or to 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


125 


miraculous deliverances from attempts made by him on Mira*s life The 
earliest surviving biographical notice, that of the Bhakta-Mala of Nabha 
D^sa, mentions an unsuccessful attempt on Mira’s life by poisoning This 
seems credible enough, given the times in which she lived But as there is a 
tradition in Dvaraka that Mira was successfully poisoned in Cittaur 
(Padmavati, p 60), and as similar traditions are circulated about Goda, 
Mira’s counterpart among the Tamil Alvars, one has to reckon with the 
possibility that even the earliest and simplest form of the tradition was no 
more than a rumour, eagerly accepted and spres^d to glorify the saint The 
later biographical literature appears to build on this first account and embel- 
lish It Fresh accounts of other escapes from death appear, m which the 
miraculous element is further accentuated The poems that refer to these 
“events” are suspect m style as well as in content (Padmavati, p 85, p 176 
Goetz, p 42 Caturvedi, p 6, p 22 D S Bhati, p 237) For the context 
in which these poems are today usually understood when taken as genuine, 
see Note 32 

42 

The reference is probably to sects who practised woman-worship in its 
cruder forms Banarasi Prasada SaksenS mentions the special connection of 
the RajpQts with Sakta forms of worship at Dhirendra Varma, p 37 

43 

The word “jana” may here only mean “Han jana”, devotees of Han, as 
in the last line of Poem 59 But the mention of a “narrow path” may imply 
that the reference is to the Guru Kabir speaks of the spiritual path as being 
“narrow ’ because there is not room for two on it The pupil has to dissolve 
his individuality in that of the Guru 

44 

The reference should be taken as being to King Vikramajita But see 
Notes 32 and 41 

45 

I e I will leave it Cp Poem 39 

46 

Reading than with D S Bhati and Sa^i Prabha 

47 

Reading mhane with §a§i Prabha, which eliminates the obviously ques- 
tionable interpretation ‘ mam ne ’ On Madan, see Note 27 
47a 

According to the most widely accepted view. Queen Karmavati, mother 
of Vikramajita Simha 

48 

Reading rakhi 

49 

The feet of the image of the Lord would be ceremonially washed ir POja 

50 

Salagrama is a black ammonite form of stone found by the Gandaki 
River, north of Patna It is worshipped as the Lord Visnu 



126 


Devotimial Poems of Mira Bai 


51 

I e Mira herself 

52 

Literally, “my nine-stnnged necklace” 

53 

See Note 49 

54 

The name Jogi suggests a wandering ascetic of the Natha sect As he is 
cut off from worldly attachments, he comes and goes like a passing cloud 
and nobody can get a hold on him 

55 

Reading garpsi By singing “piyu piyu” the cuckoo reminds Mira or her 
Beloved (priya, pnyatama, pati) 

56 

It IS related m the Eighth Skandha of the Snmad BhSgavata, Chapters 
2-4, how the Lord Visnu came to the rescue of an elephant whose foot was 
caught by a river monster when he was bathing in a pool The story illustrates 
how the Lord will come immediately to the rescue of anyone, provided they 
recognize the futility of their own individual efforts and call on Him sincerely 
for help 

57 

There appear to have been circular saws at Ka^i (BanSras) and PraySga 
(Allahabad) and other holy places where lost souls could commit suicide 
in the hope of gaining spiritual merit 

SS 

The name Rama is used, but it seems to be a clear case of the use of the 
name Rama to mean Krsna Cp Note 30 

59 

Reading chamdi with D S Bhati and §a-§i Prabha 

60 

Eka-rasQm = eka-rasa hokara Prabha) But the interpretation 

given in the translation is admittedly speculative 

61 

Charmer of the Heart, Kisna 
62 

The commentators differ over the meaning of the word ‘sadana”, but 
“new born’ seems the more natural interpretation and can be supported 
from the Braja Bhasa SOra Kosa Thus I follow D S BhSti 

63 

Items of the wandering Jogi s equipment The “sell ’ is a length of black 
wool wound round the Jogi’s horn H P Dvivedi, Kabir, p 28 

64 

Nain aniyale On this, cp naina kamala-dala se aniyare” quoted from the 
Sura Sagara in the Braja Bhasa SOra Ko^ under the heading aniySre’ 

65 

In the present translation “Ramaiya” and its vanants are translated 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


127 


*‘Kisna’% in line with the suggestion at Note 30 The authorities do not agree 
on the meaning here It has been explained as ‘‘Raina”=*‘God” in a general 
and unspecific sense, and also as the ‘*A11-Pervading One” and “He who 
dwells m every heart”, and also in other ways 

66 

Literally “Do not eat milky rice-pudding ” One moment it is so hot 
that It burns your tongue, the next it is cold and tasteless 
67 

Reading “jhatak”, and understanding the phrase as “jhatak apna na^ 
batata hai ” 

6S 

In this poem, Mira seems to be reflecting on the difiiculties of spiritual 
love First she reflects that to His devotees the Lord appears like a tease, 
first granting His love and then withdrawing it Then she seems to reflect 
despairingly on her insufficiencies, on the disparity between herself and her 
Lord and on her own presumption Finally the despair melts away with the 
dawning of an ecstatic mood, symbolized by the features of the natural scene 
m the rainy season 

69 

The Princess Draupadi of MahSbharata fame fell into the hands of the 
Kaurava princes Duryodhana and Duh^asana as a result of a gambling- 
match When she proudly refused to obey their command to sweep the 
floor, Duh^Ssana tried to disgrace her by disrobing her in the Assembly But 
she called upon the Lord in her plight, and her dress was muaculously 
lengthened everv time he pulled it away 

70 

See Note 2 

71 

See Note 56 

72 

The authorities differ on the meaning of the word hararp I follow Sa§i 
Prabha 

73 

Release from transmigration Grammatically a difficult line I have taken 
di^yam to mean “dikhfa diya” and “moccha-nevaj” as a kind of bahuvrihi 
compound meaning “One who compassionately dispenses release ” 

74 

Adopting the reading pej for laj 

75 

On Ram see Note 30 The “Sant’ interpretation could be relevant here 

76 

See Note 57 

77 

Or “He neither removed my veil nor spoke ’ There are no pronouns, 
and the commerttators differ 



12$ 


DevotMMial Poems of Mira Bai 


78 

Literally “Rama” But see Note 30 

79 

See Note 29 

80 

More literally “Not the one who loses it ” The exact hieaning of the 
line seems uncertain, but it has been taken as a bitter reproach to the Lord 

81 

The commentators differ over the meaning of the jfinal sentence. 

82 

Babul = baba = father According to the generally accepted view of Mira’s 
life, she saw little of her father when she was grown up Unless it were to be 
taken as a memory of her early childhood, the reference would apparently 
either have to be to DClda ji, Rana Sanga or Viram Deva It is a most awkward 
line Could it be a merely imagined situation 

83 

Reading karad for darad with D S Bhati 

84 

The cataka bird (Indian cuckoo) is fabled to drink only that water which 
has fallen when the moon is in the constellation of Sviti and to spurn all 
other water 

85 

Reading piva piva for pila with Sasi PrabhS The bird’s natural call is 
taken to be a repetition of the word “piva” meaning ‘Belovea” or “Darling’ 
as she waits faithfully for her “lover”, the rain-cloud that appears at the time 
when the moon is passing through the constellation of SvSti This call to the 
Beloved reminds MirS agonizingly of her absent Lord 

86 

The authorities are not agreed on the exact meaning of the last phrase 

87 

Holi IS the well-known spring festival in which the Hindus of northern 
India douche each other with coloured water and apply coloured powder to 
each other’s foreheads, amid much mirth and frolicsome rejoicing 

88 

See Note 29 

89 

A name of Krsna, apparently arising from the fact that he was born m 
the Yadava tribe descended from a certain Madhu 

90 

tan^^'tumhan (Sasi Prabha) 

91 

I follow §asi Prabha in taking puravam as first person singular, not third 
On the other interpretation the line would mean that Krma was undergoing a 
bridal ceremony with someone else in distant parts 

92 

Cf Note 87 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


129 


93 

As the earth blooms at the arrival of the rains> and as husbands normally 
return home to their families from commercial or other travel in the rainy 
season, so the Lord should follow custom and return to His faithful and lov- 
ing ‘"wife” Mira 

94 

Reading kab rau vair citaryarji with Sasi Prabha The pap ha is a species 
of cuckoo Its cry of “piu piu” has the same effect as the "piva” mentioned 
m Note 85 

95 

Literally “a saw” 

96 

Reading sukha for mukha 

97 

Reading bicharya for picharya 

98 

Reading ghun for dhun 

99 

Reading bmi for vidhi 

100 

Literally “RSma”, but see Note 30 

101 

As Note 100 
102 

Reading ghar for par 

103 

Dutiyan = dutika (l§a§i Piabha) 

104 

Reading neh (or neh) for ne with D S Bhati and Sasi Prabha 

105 

Reading nibhavarp with Sasi Prabha 

106 

On Nanda, see Note 14 

107 

Literally, “without Thee a body is no body ” I follow K D Sarma 

108 

Literally, “sit (rest) m my navel ” Nabhin=nabh« (navel) plus n, locative 
termination (Sasi Prabha) 

109 

amti (de§aja) = sararat R S Sukla’s Bhasa Sabda Kosa 

Sat'ouru The Tantnkas, Nathas and Sants emphasized the “internal” 
Guru Vaudeville, Kabir, p 136 f 

111 

Literally, ‘do not absent yourself ’ 



130 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


112 

If water falls on them in this month, it changes into pearls So J T Platts 
p 691 (under svati, svati) 

113 

A little earlier than Mira, the Bangah Kisna-poet Candidasa attributed 
a similar belief in crows as a good omen of the coming of the Beloved to 
Radha Cp H P Dvivedi, Madhya-Kalina Dharma-Sadhana p 193 The 
tradiponal belief was that the appearance of a crow portended the arrival of 
the Beloved, but that the abandoned one must say to the crow, "‘Go a\va>, 
my beloved is coming ” (D S Bhati) 

113 a 

This poem appeals to be in the style of a Barahamasa, a Rajasthani folk- 
song celebrating the distinctive features of the seasons of the year Padmavati 

p 82 

114 

The commentators are not agreed over this obscure line 

115 

&sa IS the serpent with a thousand heads who forms the couch and 
canopy for Visnu when the latter is at rest between successive world-periods 
As he has a thousand heads he also has a thousand tongues and is conse- 
quently very eloquent and very wise Siva and Sesa in their own very different 
ways are both emblems of wisdom Yet Mira s Jogi (Krsna) is so supremely 
wise that even J§iva and Sesa are happy to meditate on Him, for inspiration 

116 

IS here not a negative but a jussive particle (Sasi Prabha) 

116 a 

On digna as “to shudder’, cp TuiasidSsa, Kavitavali 111, quoted in 
Tulasi Sabda Sagara digati urvi ati gurvi 

117 

On Ahilya, see Note 5 The Lord touched the stone statue of Ahilya, and 
Ahilya’s body recovered its beauty and was transported to the skies If the 
Lord could raise a whole stone statue to the skies surely He could easily 
raise up Mira wasting away and thin as a rake 

118 

The authorities are not agreed on the meaning of this obscure phrase 
I follow K D Sarma The Sura Kosa and Tulasi Sabda Sagara support 
^‘^obha dena ’ as the meaning of ‘chajna’ 

119 

Another obscure phrase I follow Sasi Prabha in taking balihanvai as an 
imperative 

120 

Reading “chau (you are) plus ji ’ 

121 

Literally "the world knows ” 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


131 


122 

Dr Sasi Prabha avoids all reference to the “anhad” music here, and I 
follow her m this 

123 

Mira here calls upon Krsna as “Giridhara Govardhana”, two names 
having the same meaning See Note 8 

124 

I e Draupadi, see Note 69 

125 

According to the Vaisnava traditions, the demons called Daityas stole the 
Vedas from the gods at the beginning of the world-period and Visnu assumed 
the form of a horse (haya) or horse-necked creature (haya-griva) and slew 
the Daityas and recovered the Vedas for the benefit of the gods There are 
various forms of the legend 

126 

Or my Master’ Sitaraj^ Persian $ar-taj 

127 

A list of names is given by Y Sarma and T Tandan m their tika But the 
line need not necessarily be taken as evidence that Mira visited distant parts 
of South India It could well be just a vague indication that she visited many 
places of pilgrimage, or even a mere assertion that even if she had done so 
she would have returned empty The phrase occurs also in Poem 30 

128 

Ajamila was a fallen Brahmin whose sins were erased and who was trans- 
ported to the abode of Visnu simply because he called for his son on his death- 
bed and his son’s name happened to be Narayana Such is the power of the 
holy Name of God 

129 

Sadana was a dc\otee of Visnu who plied the (in a Hindus eyes) degrading 
trade of a butcher It happened that one of the weights he used came from 
the Salagrama stone (see Note 50) A holy man recognized it and took it 
away to worship it, but was instructed in a dream to return it When Sadana 
heard of this, he gave up his trade and went to Bhuvane^vara as a wandering 
beggai Eventually he obtained release His case is often cited by the 
Bhaktas to show that it is internal piety and goodness that coi nt in attracting 
the grace of the Lord and not the external circumstances 

130 

See Note ^6 

131 

The courtesan Jivanti lacked a child and acquired a pet parrot as a 
substitute She taught it to say the Name of God ‘ Rama’ , and together 
they would repeat it At her death she and the parrot were transported by 
aerial chariot to the realm of Visnu Such is the purifying effect of the 
repetition of the Name of God 



132 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


132 

The hunchback woman was a devotee of Krsna who served at the court 
of King Kamsa m Mathura Krsna miraculously straightened her body 
For the wild woman of the woods, see Note 144 and Poem 186 

133 

Some of the commentators enumerate the eight “bonds” mentioned in the 
Kularnava Tantra, hatred, shame, fear, doubt, disgust, family-convention, 
individual disposition and caste-custom The list fits the context, but one 
may doubt if Mira took inspiration directly from Tantrika sources 

134 

Reading varyam for vasyarp 

135 

See Note 56 

136 

See Note 69 

137 

See Note 2 

138 

1 e Ahilya, wife of Rishi Gautama See Notes 5 and 117 

139 

Sudama, Krsna’s boyhood friend, fell upon evil days in later life, and 
went to see Krsna, taking as a present a few grams of rice that his wife had 
managed to save with the greatest difficulty Kysna accepted the gift joyously 
and later heaped great wealth on Sudama 

140 

According to tradition, Kabir, the renowned mystic, gave away all the 
cloth he had woven in the bazaar, down to the very clothes he was wearing, 
and did not dare to go back home to his family naked and empty-handed 
But the Lord assumed the form of a nch merchant and took an ox laden 
with provisions to Kabir’s home 

141 

It is said that the house of the saint Ntaia Deva caught fire As the saint 
worshipped God in everything, he took the opportunity to worship Him in 
the fire, into which he made an offering of his other belongings * The Lord, 
pleased with this resignation, personally attended to the mending of the saint’s 
roof that night 

142 

The saint Dhanna was a farmer One day he set off to plough but gave 
away all his seed to feed the holy men and then ploughed his field without 
seed, as he was embara^sed to return to fais family without having ploughed 
Later the field sprouted miraculously 

143 

See Note 56 

144 

The wild woman of the forest, Saban, had nothing but plums to offer the 
avatara Rama She bit into them to pick out the ripe ones, but Rama accepted 
the gift gladly and ate the soiled plums 



DeYotional Poems of Mira Bai 


133 


145 

See Note 139 

146 

Karama Bai lived m Jagamiatha Pun and offered the Lord milk and rice 
with devotion Eventually He assumed the form of a child and came to eat 
It in her house A holy man informed Karam§. Bai that she was not observ- 
ing the proper ritual before cookmg The next day she was late with 
the milk and nee as she had been busy with the ritual When the pnests threw 
open the temple gates that morning they saw the remains of food round the 
lips of the image The deity explamed by means of a voice from the sky 
that Karama Bai was late with the food and He had had to hurry eating it 
The point of the tradition is that the Lord cares more for offenngs made with 
a loving heart than for meticulous performance of ritual 

147 

The commentators are divided over the meaning of this obscure phrase 
I follow Y Sarma and T Tandan, who agree with Sasi Prabha in taking 
pani to mean water If pani meant prani (as it does for K D Sarma and 
D S Bhati) the meaning would be something like “The whole world is saved, 
from stones (like Ahilya) to livmg creatures ” This interpretation, though 
not here adopted, is defensible Cp Tulasidasa, Vinaya Patnka 257, p^ana, 
pasu, patanga, kola, bhila, nisicara/katpca te krpanidhana kiye subarana 

148 

On the courtesan, see Note 131, on the elephant Note 56, on Ajamila 
Note 128 Garuda, the vehicle of Visnu, has a body half like a man and half 
like an eagle with brilliant plumage He is personified as an ideal devotee 
Originally he was the sun, conceived m Vedic times as a marvellous bird and 
in the Puranas as a servant of Vispu 

149 

Reading jaga for gaja 

150 

Vifthala Natha is now usually held to have been originally a local deity, 
who came to be worshipped as Krspa m company with His spouse Rukmmi 
m the temple of Pandharpur, some 200 miles south-east of Bombay Already 
some centuries before Mira’s birth, the devotees of Vitthala Natha constituted 
a pious sect of Visnu-worshippers Great Teachers had already appeared, 
such as the author of the famous Jnane§vari Commentary on the Gita, and 
Nama Deva, who has already been mentioned in Poem 139 (see Note 141) 
The latter appears to have travelled north and composed some hymns m 
Hindi as well as the hymns in his native Marathi The teachings of this school 
were broadly similar to those of Mira, so there is no incongruity m finding a 
reference to Vitthala Natha in her works What distinguishes Mirabai from 
the Krsna poets of other schools and unites her with that of Jnanesvara is 
her refusal to draw any firm distinction between worship of the Lord with 
form and worship of the formless P Caturvedi, Bhakti Sahitya mem 
Madhuropasana, p 82 K D iSarma (p 17) is surely right to remark that 
the reference is not to Vitthala, the Guru of Raidasa’s school 



134 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


151 

The translator is unsure of the meaning of citta-mala It has been taken 
as meant to suggest the continuous revolving of thoughts m the mind like 
the continuous revolving of the beads of a rosary Citta^man merri (Sasi 
Prabha) 

152 

Names of Visnu, who is nevertheless predominantly conceived as Ki sna 
by Mira 

153 

A conception which has also appeared in Poems 84 and 101, and which 

goes back to the oldest prose Upanishads, notably Bi hadaranyaka Upan 
III VII I 

154 

Purusottama, cp Bhagctv^ad Gita X 15, XI 3, XV 18 and 19 etc 

155 

Another name foi* Visnu, referiing to the fact that He bestrode the uni- 
verse in three strides 

156 

Literally, There is no under-garment ” A perplexing phrase because,. 

1 taken literally, it seems to conflict with the first half of the sentence I follow 
Sarma and T Tandan in softening and generalizing the meaning Mira 

o ers herself mind, body and soul to Krsna as a bride offers herself to her 
husband 

157 

Indra is Jupiter Pluvius, the god of rain 

158 

The commentators take the ‘‘five companions ’ of the text as the five 
senses But the term “five” was also used to mean “some’ , and the literal 
meaning of sakhyarp seems to yield the better sense Compare Poem 174 
below, and also Tulasid^as Rama Carita M^asa IIxxivl, mill dasa 
pamca rama pahim jahim 

159 

The rite is associated with thoughts of the husband “Maidens worship 
Gouri and invoke Her grace and blessings for securing a suitable bridegroom 
She is adored by married women also for securing long life for their husbands ” 
Svami :§ivananda, p 128 

160 

On Holi, see Note 87 There are obviously elements of symbolism in the 
poem The poet’s soul, dyed in the love of Krsna, is evoked by the mention 
of the dyed water used in the Holi festival and so forth 
161 

Sajam is taken to mean susajjita hai Literally, “Every limb of my body 
is decoiated with joy ’ 

162 

Sitaraj=-sar-taj, literally “my crown’ 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


135 


163 

Literally, ‘ the crown of (amongst) men of good taste ” 

164 

Literally, “Either my dearest Beloved knows my pain or else I do ” 

165 

K D Sarma very appositely quotes from Kabir’s Granthavali, Doha 
section, Nigunam kau anga, “Kabir hari rasa barakhiya etc “Water 
collects in low ground, not on mountain-tops ” The quotation supports 
Dr Sarma’s contention that the present poem was composed under the 
influence of Sant teaching 

166 

Kara=kara liya (Sa^i Prabha) The present poem is difficult to inter- 
pret There are piactically no pronouns, and the commentators are divided 
on the question whether the strictures it contains are addressed to Mira 
herself or to others In the present translation, the clearly expressed ‘me”" 
(mohim) of ‘ has bound me with the cord of greed” has been taken to 
set the tone of the whole poem This follows Y N Sarma and T Tandan- 

167 

Phirya = phin (fern) (Sasi Prabha) 

168 

The elder brothei of Ki sna, brought up with Him in the family of Nanda 
at Gokula 

169 

The serpent Kaliya cp Note 6 There are various forms of the legend 

170 

Dr Sasi Prabha records baith’ as a feminine form here, according to which 
it would have to be the sa i that was “sitting on the branch of a tree,” sub- 
sequently to be removed from it by Krsna All the previous translations 
consulted, however, put Kisna Himself on the branch of the tree, which agrees 
with iSnmad Bhagavata X xxn 9 (Ramaswami Sastrulu Ed, Madras, Vol 
ir, p 1326) It seems to be a doubtful case 

171 

Reading “de mohirp tan’ m this line and “de mohim garl” in the following 
one following D S Bhati and also Y N Sarma and T Tan^an 

172 

In this and the previous poem Krsna manifests as a mischievous little 
boy But in doing so He evokes a response of such simple-hearted love 
from His devotee that He shows Himself to be a greater “rasika” and “nagara” 
than any worldly exponent of the art of love It is worth remarking that the 
following line referring to a mother-m-Iaw and a sister-in-law is very probably 
an interpolation Miia’s alleged “sister-m-law ’ Oda is a shadowy figure 
indeed, and her historical existence has apparently never been proved 
Padmavati “!§abnam’ thinks that she is a mental creation arising from the 
belief that ‘Oda’ , the shortened form of “Udayakama”, the name of Rana 
Raymal’s parricide elder borther, had a feminine termination and referred 
to a woman (Padmavati p 172 etc ) But in this context, it seems that the 



136 


DevotiOBal Poems of Mira Bai 


name of Vikramajiia s younger brother Udaya Sirpha could be invoked with 
equal cogency 

173 

Taking “hajan"’ to mean a form of chaplet or necklace as at the line 
quoted by Padmavati ‘‘Sabnam” (Padmavati, p 6, footnote 5, and p 85, 
pahiro hara hajan) The line quoted concerns Oda and can hardly be by 
Mira But it seems to provide the best clue to the meaning of ‘ hajan” in the 
present context 

174 

lerpgo^^Iuipga (!§asi Prabha) It is assumed here that this can be used as 
a feminine But the meaning seems obscure throughout the second half of 
the poem Each of the three earlier translations consulted takes it differently, 
and the general absence of pronouns helps to reduce the translator to guess- 
work I follow K D J§arma in thinking that in the first few lines Mira is 
speaking about herself, then the subject changes to Radha, and finally it 
returns to Mira herself 

175 

Gagara is probably a better reading than nagara, as the verb hati is in 
the feminine I again follow K D J§arma, as also in attributing the golden 
pot to Mira’s head and not to Kisna’s The commentators differ here, 
probably on account of the absence of pronouns 

176 

Buddhi=hos (Sasi Prabha) Cp Poem 87, last line 

177 

Gujariya, strictly a woman of the ‘ Gujar” caste, an inferior caste of 
Rajputs, but by extension a cowherd-maiden generally (Platts, p 923, 
under the heading Gujar) 

178 

Literally, “like the moon on the second day of the lunar month ” 

179 

Krura Akrura, cruel Akrura, a play on words AkrOra was Krsna s uncle, 
sent by the wicked King Kamsa to fetch Krsna and Balarama from Bmda- 
vana to take part in the games at Mathura 

180 

The friend of Krsna, sent by Him from Mathura to the Gopis of 
Bindavana with a letter of consolation 
181 

Reading ‘ pahli jhana ma nahirp kmhau ’ where “ma” is taken to mean 
^ O companion ’ and is droppxed m the translation 
182 

Literally, ‘packed the parcel of ’ 

183 

Rainam— rat (Sasi Prabha) The line is somewhat obscure Apparently 
Mira IS vividly imagining herself in the presence of the Lord in Bmdavana, 
even the Christian saints have vividly imagined themselves in the presence 
of Christ on the cross 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


137 


184 

It IS reasonable to take the opening lines of this poem as spoken by the 
Oopis in chorus See Note 180 

185 

Literally Rama But see Note 30 For the elephant, see Note 56 

186 

See Note 144 

187 

The heaven of Visnu 

188 

As at Note 185 

189 

See Note 139 

190 

Mira uses the term bhavaja (= Sanskrit bhratr-jaya), of which the familiar 
modern form is bhabhi Strictly the term means the wife of an elder brother, 
but Its use IS extended m various ways Here it is used to refer to the wife of a 
friend so intimate as to regard himself as a brother 

191 

Unfortunately, the authorities are not agreed over the force of the key- 
word* baitho” m this obscure verse I follow the line of K D Sarma, who 
renders it *T sat” Y N Sarma and T Tandan render it “you sat”, as does 
Bhu vanes vara Natha Misra (p 168 f) iSasi Prabha renders it m the 
imperative, “Be seated” 

192 

A cloth used to cover the hand in which the rosary is held from view 

193 

I e as a result of her deeds in previous births 

194 

Hanscandra, King of Ayodhya, was so virtuous that he attracted the 
envy of Indra, who sent the sage Vi:§vamitra to test him Having first extracted 
his kingdom as a charitable gift, Visvamitra then came begging for money 
The King took service as a water-carrier in the house of a low-caste man to 
earn some money to give to the sage This was only a small part of his 
tribulations 

195 

At the end of the Mahabharata, it is recorded how the Pan^ava brothers 
climbed up the Himalayas with their queen. Queen Draupadi, and that the 
latter was the first to fail 
195a 

The demon Bah aimed to oust Indra, king of the gods But he was tricked 
by Vi nu in the form of the holy Dwarf, and ended up banished to Patala, 
the realm in the nether regions below the earth 

196 

See Note 32 



138 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bat 


196a 

This poem seems to fall into the same class as Nazir’s “DuniyS bhi kyS. 
tamasa hai,” “Nazir ki BSm”, Ed “Firaq”, Allahabad, 1953, p 120 

197 

According to the poetic convention, the partridge is so much in love with 
the moon that it swallows burning coals, mistaking them for fragments of 
the moon 
197a 

There seem to be two levels of meaning in this poem At one level Mira 
>s referring to the pure waters of the inmost core of the soul, always present 
but only to be “reached” by utter detachment from everything external, 
achieved through meditative practices (sadhanS) But the individual soul 
that has merged with the supreme Self is known m Indian spiritual tradition 
as a swan (hamsa, paramaharpsa) Cp iSveta^vatara Upanishad VI 15 
So Mira is also apparently addressing the pupil-devotee and saying “Go 
and associate with the Paramahaipsas in sat-sang on the highest plane of 
spintual detachment ” K D Sarmt and D S Bhati rightly draw attention 
to the presence of the characteristic imagery of the Sant or Nirguna tradition 
•n this poem References to the “sahaja” state of consciousness as an “inac- 
cessible place” are common to many forms of Xantnka teaching Cp Vaude- 
'^he, Kabir, p 125 As regards Kabir, see the references given in the Kabir 
Ko§a of Parasuraraa Caturvedi and Mahendra under “agama” and “haiiisa” 

198 

The interpretation is doubtful “Jugataip” has here been taken to mean 
“yuktiyarp” following Y N SarmS and T Tanijan 

199 

I e there one may acquire the sixteen kinds of spiritual virtue, which are 
actually detailed in another familiar version of the poem 

200 

Rama-Nama But see Note 30 
201 

Reading rang for sang 
202 

Rana'chor=He who abandoned the battle, a name given to Krsna in the 
vernacular to commemorate the fact that He abandoned the defence of Mathura 
when It was attacked by Jarasandha and retired to Dvaraka Miri is believed 
to have died in the temple of Rana-chor at Dvaraka There is at least some 
presumption that she lived and worshipped there or m that general locality 
towards the end of her life 

203 

Jhamlara = lataki hm motivom ki lanyarp (§a§i Prabha) 

204 

A name of Krsna which addi esses Him as the adolescent son of Nanda 



INDEX OF POEMS 


INDEX OF POEMS 


akhayaiji tara^a darasana pyasi 
45 

acche mithe cakh cakh 186 
apape karam ko chai dos 183 
ab to nibhayaip 62 
asa prabhu jaija na dijai 16 
aj anari legayo sari 169 
aj mhaipro sadhu janano san- 
gare 30 

aju ^unya hari avara ri 121 
ali mhape laga 160 
all ri mhare neparp 14 
ali samvaro ki drsti 174 
avata mori galiyan mem 171 
av sajamya 126 
avaip mana mohapa ji 99 
avo manamofaana ji 100 
avo sahelya 26 
aisi lagan lagai 49 
kamala dala locapa 168 
karanaip supi syam meri 94 
karama gata tararp nahi 
taraip 189 

kahaip kaham jaum tere sath 
176 

kaipi mharo japama baram- 
bar 196 

kipa sang khelum holi 80 
kupa bamcai pati 185 
koi dm yad karo 55 
koi syama manohara lyori 178 
ko birahini ko dukha jampai 73 
giradhara risapa kaun gupaip 60 
giradhari saranamthari aya 134 
gokula ke basi 163 


govinda gadha chauji 125 
gohane gupala phirum 184 
ghari cep pa 102 
calaipagama va des 193 
calam mapava jamapa kaip: 
tir 161 

calani vahi desa pritama 1 53 
choda mata jajyo ji 48 
jagamam jivana thora 197 
(mhamro) japama japama ro 
sathi 106 

jago bamsivare lalana 165 
japam re mohapa 56 
japyaip na prabhu milapa 43 
javade javade jogi 57 
jogiyajiajyo 116 
jogiya ji nisadina 44 
jogiya ne kahajyo 117 
jogiyari pritari 54 
jogiya se prita kiyarp 53 
jogI mata ja mata ja 46 
jogi mhamne darasa diyaip 97 
josira pe lakh badhaya 144 
jhatakyo men cir 170 
dan gayo manamohana 65 
pato samvaro ri 72 
nenam banaja basavam ri 15 
penam lobharn atakam 13 
tanaka hari citavarp 5 
tero maram nahiip payo re 188 
thamne kami kami bol sunava 5 1 
thari chab pyari lage 152 
tharo rupa dekhyam ataki 9 
them jimya giradharalala 47 
them to palak ugharo 1 1 8 



140 

them mata barajam main 28 
them bma mhare kon 131 
darasa bma dukham 103 
dekhata rama hamse sudamam 
kum 187 

dekham mai han mana katha 
kiyam 52 

dhutara jogi eka-rasum 58 
nandanadana mana bhayam 142 
nahim sukha bhavai thamro 
desalaro 32 

nagara nanda-kumara 1 05 
nipata bankata chab an take 10 
nindaii avam na saram rat 75 
paga bandha ghumgharyam 
nacyarl 36 

patiyam maim kaise likhum 76 
papaiya re piva ki vani 84 
parama sanehi rama ki njti 67 
piya ab para ajyo mere 95 
piya thare nama 140 
piya mohim darasana dijai ho 
115 

piya mhamre nainam agam 50 
piya bma rahyam na jayam 71 
pyare darasana dijyo 101 
prabhu ji them kaham gaya 64 
prabhu so milana kaise hoy 159 
prabhu bma na sarai mai 89 
premani premam pramani re 173 
bande bandagi mati bhula 198 
bare ghara talo lagam n 24 
baraji rf mham syam bma na 
rahyam 29 

barasam ri badanya savan ri 
146 

basyam mhare nenana mam 3 

bddal dekha jhari 82 

badala re thejala bharya ajyo 149 


DeTOtional Poems of Mira Bai 

bidha bidhana ri nyaram 190 
bhai hom bavarl sun ke bam- 
suri 167 

bhajamana carana kamval 195 
bhai mhare supana mam 27 
bhuvana-pati them dhari ajyam 
Ji 96 

bhije mhamro damvan cir 122 
mana them parasa han re 
carana 1 

matavaro badara 81 
mai mero mohane mana haryo 
172 

mai mham govinda guna gana 
39 

mai mham govinda, guna 
gasyam 31 

mai mhari han hum 66 
mai ri mha liyam govindam 
mol 122 

mai samvare ranga raci 19 
milta jajyo ho ji gumani 130 
miram magana bhai 41 
miram lagau ranga hari 25 
muja abala ne moti niranta 
thai re 141 

muraliya baja jamana tir 166 
meri kanam sunajyo 136 
mere ghara avau sundarasyama 
124 

mere priyatama pyare rama 
kum 123 

mero bero lagajyo par 135 
maim to giradhara ke ghara 
jaum 20 

maim to ten sarana pari 133 
maim to tore carana lagi 127 
mham giradhara agam nacyari 1 7 
mhaip giradhara ranga rati 23 



Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


141 


mhane cakara rakhamji 154 
mhamohanaro rupa lubhani 11 
mharam ri giradhara gopala 18 
mhamri sudha jyum 111 
mhare ajyo ji ramam 1 14 
mhatnre ghara ajyo 112 
mhare ghara avo syama 120 
mhamre ghara ramato hi 98 
mhamre ghara hota ajyo 109 
mhare dere ajyo 151 
mharo olagiya ghara ajyo ji 119 
mharo gokul ro braja-vasi 6 
mharo pranama bamke 
biharijl 2 

mharo mana samvaro 200 
mharo mana hara linya rana- 
chor 202 

mharo samvaro braja-vasi 194 
mha lagam ’agana sin carana 
ri 128 

mham sunyaqi han 1 37 
yahi vidhi bhakti 158 
ya vraja mem kachu dekhyo ri 
177 

yo to ranga dhattam 40 
langa bhari raga bhari 148 
ramaiya mere tohi suip lay! 
neha 59 

ramaiya bina ninda na aval 74 
ranajl the kyamne rakho 
mhamsOm bair 34 
raniji the jahar diyo 38 
ranajl mhane ya badnami 33 
rama nama rasa pijat manuaip 
199 

ri mham baithyam jagam 86 
ri mhara par 155 
re samvahya mhare 145 
lagana ko namv 191 


lagan mhari syam sum lago 201 
lagi sohi janai 192 
letam letam rama nama re 157 
vari-vari ho rama kahuip 113 
saiyam, turn vini ninda na avai 
92 

sakhi mhamro samariya nai 21 
sakhi mharo kanuro 164 
sakhi mhari ninda nasani ho 87 
sakhi ri laj vairana bhai 182 
sajani kab milisyam piva 
mharam 1 10 

sajana sudha jyum jane 107 
saip.variyo ranga racam rana 
37 

samvari surata mana re basi 88 
samvaro nanda-nandana 12 
samvaro mharo pnta 129 
sajana mhare dhari 150 
savana de rahya joro re 147 
samvahya mharo chaya 68 
sisodyo ruthyo 35 
sunyari mhare han 143 
syama milana re kaj 91 
syama milana ro ghano ubhavo 
108 

syama mhaiji baiphanyaip 138 
syama mhamsum aindo 181 
syama bina duhkha pavam 
sajani 156 

syama vina sakhi 69 
syama sundara para varam 93 
han them harya jana ro bhir 61 
han bina kuna gati meri 63 
han vina kyum jivaip ri may 
90 

han mhara jivana prana 
adhara 4 

han mharo sunajyau araj 132 



142 


Devotional Poems of Mira Bai 


he ma ban bai i ankhiyan varo 
7 

he mere mana mohana 85 
heri ma nanda ko gumani 8 
heri mha darad divanam 70 
hell mhamsum han bini 42 
ho kanam kma gunthi zulfam 
162 


ho gaye syama duija ke canda 
180 

hoji han kita gaye 179 
holi khelata haim gtradhari 
175 

holi piya bina lagam ri khan 77 
holi piya Vina mhanena 
bhavam 78 



